Chronic kidney disease (CKD) can be defined in a variety of ways. 
The US Preventive Health Service defines it as decreased kidney 
function, with size-adjusted estimated glomerular filtration rate 
(eGFR/1.73 m2) <60 mL/min, or as kidney damage that persists for 
at least 3 months.
The management of a patient with CKD involves the follow-
ing considerations: screening, etiologic diagnosis, and staging of the 
CKD severity; identifying and managing patients at high risk of pro-
gression; management of complications of CKD; and preparing the 
patient for transplantation or renal replacement therapy.
 I. SCREENING, DIAGNOSIS, AND ST AGING. S creening should include 
monitoring for the presence of proteinuria and measurement of 
kidney function. Screening should focus on patients with CKD 
risk factors. These include diabetes mellitus, hypertension, car -
diovascular disease, history of smoking, obesity, age >60 years,  
indigenous racial origin, and a family history of CKD.
A. Urinary protein measurement.  T he US Preventive Health Service 
recommends urinary protein measurement as a screening test 
in all high-risk individuals. The American Diabetes Associa-
tion (ADA) recommends that an evaluation for microalbumin-
uria be performed in all type 2 diabetic patients at the time of 
diagnosis and in all type 1 diabetic patients 5 years after ini-
tial evaluation. Screening can be done by urine dipstick, but 
a more reliable method is an early morning measurement of 
the  albumin-to-creatinine ratio in a spot urine sample. The 
dipstick used should be able to detect both albumin and evi-
dence of blood or white cells. If the dipstick test suggests ei-
ther blood or white cell activity, then a microscopic analysis 
of the urinary sediment should be performed. Table 1.1 lists 
several limitations of urine dipstick evaluation. One problem 
with urine dipstick tests is that they measure concentration 
only, and can give falsely negative results in a dilute urine. 
The urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR) overcomes this 
problem by looking at the ratio of albumin to creatinine, as 
both will be affected by dilution, and the effects of dilution will 
Approach to Patients with 
Chronic Kidney Disease, 
Stages 1–4
Ajay Singh
1
2
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   2 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 3
tend to cancel out. In terms of milligrams albumin per gram 
or millimole of creatinine, normoalbuminuria is defined as 
<30 mg/g (<3 mg/mmol); microalbuminuria as 30–300 mg/g 
(3–30 mg/mmol); and macroalbuminuria as >300 mg/g (>30 
mg/mmol). These cutoffs correspond only roughly to albu-
minuria measured in terms of milligrams per day (e.g., 30 and 
300 mg per day), and they assume that 1 g of creatinine is be-
ing excreted per day. In fact, the average amount of creatinine 
excreted per day is actually higher, and as discussed elsewhere 
in this chapter, creatinine excretion is greater in men than in 
women and in young people versus older people. However, 
fine-tuning these “cutoff ” UACR ratios is not of great clinical 
importance, as the risk of increased urine albumin excretion 
is continuous, and risk is increased even when the albumin 
excretion is <30 mg per day. The UACR can be done at any 
time, but a morning test may increase sensitivity and will 
tend to exclude the relatively benign condition of orthostatic 
proteinuria, where, proteinuria is present during the day, but 
ceases while the subject is sleeping supine. A positive UACR 
test should be repeated at least twice over 3 months to exclude 
acute kidney injury and to confirm a positive test.
B. Measurement of kidney function
1. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) . The GFR, usually expressed
in terms of milliliters per minute, is the volume of serum
cleared by the kidneys per unit of time. The GFR depends
on body size and age, and so an isolated value of GFR needs 
to be evaluated in context. One usually normalizes GFR
to body surface area, specifically, per 1.73 m
2. In healthy
subjects, GFR/1.73 m 2 is similar in men and women, but
GFR/1.73 m 2 declines with age, averaging about 115 mL/
min in young adults, 100 mL/min in the middle-aged, and
then dwindling to 90, 80, and 70 mL/min as patient age in-
creases to 60, 70, and 80 years, respectively.
Limitations of Urine Dipstick
1.1
TABLE
False Negatives
Low urine-specific gravity (<1.010)
High urine salt concentration
Acidic urine
Nonalbumin proteinuria
False Positives
Presence of blood or semen
Alkaline urine
Detergents/disinfectants
Radiocontrast agents
High urine-specific gravity (>1.030)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   3 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
4
2. Serum creatinine.  Creatinine is produced at a relatively
constant rate from creatine in muscle and is excreted by
the kidneys by both glomerular filtration and tubular se-
cretion. Normal creatinine concentrations range from 0.6
to 1.0 mg/dL (53–88 mcmol/L) in women and from 0.8
to 1.3  mg/dL (70–115 mcmol/L) in men. Measurement of
the serum creatinine concentration is one way to obtain a
rough estimate of the level of renal function, because as re-
nal function falls, creatinine will continue to be produced,
and the serum levels will rise. The relationship between
serum creatinine and renal function is nonlinear: a dou -
bling of the serum creatinine will reflect a decline in GFR
of approximately 50%. Doubling of serum creatinine from
an initially low value can result in a serum creatinine still
in the “normal range” despite a substantial loss of kidney
function. Serum creatinine levels are influenced by muscle
mass, recent dietary intake, especially of cooked meat, and 
concomitant drug therapy (e.g., treatment with cimetidine, 
a drug that blocks tubular secretion of creatinine and which 
will slightly increase the serum creatinine without any ef-
fect on GFR). In patients with cirrhosis and ascites, estima-
tion of renal function from serum creatinine is particularly 
difficult. There can be a very low creatinine production rate 
due to extremely low muscle mass (low creatinine produc-
tion rate), plus it often is difficult to determine ascites-free
body weight for normalization. In such patients, serum cre-
atinine levels in the 0.5–1.0-mg/dL range (44–88 mcmol/L), 
nominally “normal, ” may reflect moderately to markedly
impaired levels of renal function. Even in patients without
cachexia, the serum creatinine level must always be inter -
preted in the context of a patient’s muscle mass. For ex -
ample, a serum creatinine of 1.3 mg/dL (115 mcmol/L) can 
represent a creatinine clearance of 94 mL/min in a young
80-kg male, or a creatinine clearance of only 28 mL/min in
an elderly, 50-kg female (Macgregor and Methven, 2011).
Until recently the serum creatinine was measured by a 
variety of methods, some of which, due to interfering sub-
stances in the blood, deviated substantially from “true” val-
ues of creatinine concentration as determined by isotope 
dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS). In the United States 
and many other countries, laboratories are now normal -
izing their measurement methods to IDMS, and the nor -
malized values tend to be lower than those obtained using 
other methods.
3. Creatinine clearance by timed urine collection.  A timed (usu -
ally 24 hours) urine collection of creatinine excretion can
be used to calculate the creatinine clearance (C
Cr), which
is defined as the volume of serum cleared of creatinine
per minute. Normal C
Cr is approximately 95 ± 20 mL/
min in average-size adult women and 125 ± 25 mL/min in
 average-size adult men. Patients are instructed to urinate
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   4 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 5
into the toilet on arising, and to mark this time as the start 
of the collection period. Next they are to pass all of their 
urine into a container during the ensuing day and night. 
The following morning, the patients are to urinate into the 
container one last time, and to note this time as the end 
of the collection period. By dividing the amount of creati-
nine in the collected urine by the number of minutes in the 
collection period (start time to finish time), the laboratory 
can calculate the per minute rate of creatinine excretion. A 
sample of blood must be drawn at some point during the 
urine collection period in which the serum creatinine level 
is measured. To calculate creatinine clearance, one simply 
divides the per minute creatinine excretion rate by the se-
rum value. This gives the volume per minute of serum that 
had to have been “cleared” of creatinine by the kidneys. 
For example, if the per minute creatinine excretion rate is 
1.0 mg/min, and the serum creatinine level is 1 mg/dL, or 
0.01 mg/mL, then 1.0/0.01 = 100 mL/min of serum were 
on average being cleared of creatinine by the kidneys dur -
ing the collection period. Despite the technical challenge 
of collecting urine properly, timed urine collections are a 
very useful means of estimating kidney function in cachec-
tic patients, including those with cirrhosis and ascites, as 
well as markedly obese patients. The completeness of the 
urine collection for creatinine can be estimated by com-
paring the amount of creatinine recovered per day based 
on the expected daily creatinine excretion rate for a given 
patient based on sex and body weight. Thus, one expects 
daily creatinine excretion to be about 15–20 mg/kg lean 
body weight in women and 20–25 mg/kg lean body weight 
in men. A more exact estimate of daily creatinine excretion 
rate can be obtained from the use of an equation incorpo-
rating body weight, gender, age, and race, such as that de-
veloped by Ix (2011), and which is detailed as a nomogram 
in Appendix A. A creatinine excretion rate that is signifi-
cantly less than expected usually indicates an incomplete 
urine collection.
Because creatinine is cleared by the renal tubules in 
addition to being filtered at the glomerulus, the creatinine 
clearance is greater than GFR. When GFR/1.73 m 2 is very 
low (e.g., less than 10–15 mL/min), the proportion of cre-
atinine excretion due to tubular secretion is high. To get a 
more reliable estimate of GFR when GFR is low, one can 
measure the amounts of both creatinine and urea in the 
timed urine sample, and measure the serum urea level as 
well as the creatinine level during the collection period. 
The per minute clearance of urea is calculated in the same 
way as for creatinine. Urea is filtered at the glomerulus, but 
then some urea is reabsorbed by the renal tubules, so with 
urea, the situation is opposite to that with creatinine; due 
to tubular reabsorption, the urea clearance will be less than 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   5 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
6
the GFR, whereas the creatinine clearance will be greater 
than the GFR. Averaging the urea and creatinine clearances 
has been shown to give a good estimate of GFR in patients 
with GFR less than 10–15 mL/min.
4. Estimated creatinine clearance.  To avoid the inaccuracies and
inconvenience of timed urine collections, creatinine clear -
ance (C Cr) can be estimated by using equations that esti-
mate the per minute creatinine excretion rate based on age, 
body size, gender, and in some equations, race. One equa-
tion that has been used for this is the Cockcroft–Gault 
equation: 
Estimated C
Cr =  (140 − Age) × (0.85 if female) × 
(W in kg) / (72 × SCr in mg/dL)
or
Estimated CCr =  (140 − Age) × (0.85 if female) × 
(W in kg) / (0.814 × SCr in mcmol/L)
where W is body weight. This equation provides a quick 
and reasonably accurate estimate of renal function at the 
bedside. The more recently developed Ix equation (Ix, 
2011), described in Appendix A, also can be used. The Ix 
equation was developed and validated in a much larger 
sample of individuals, including blacks, and was based on 
modern, IDMS-calibrated laboratory measures of creati -
nine. Neither equation is very accurate in markedly obese 
or cachectic patients. Some have suggested that the ac-
curacy of the Cockcroft–Gault equation can be increased 
by using actual body weight for cachectic patients, ideal 
body weight for normal weight patients, and adjusted 
body weight for markedly obese patients (Brown, 2013). 
See 
 Appendix B for more details.
5. Estimated GFR
a. Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) equation.  This
equation was derived from the MDRD trial and reports
eGFR normalized per 1.73 m 2 of body surface area. For
laboratories using the new IDMS-standardized serum
creatinine values, the version of the MDRD equation that 
should be used is what follows:
eGFR/1.73 m
2 =  175 × [S Cr] − 1.154 × [Age] − 0.203
× [0.742 if patient is female] × [1.210 if 
patient is black].
The “175” term in this equation replaces the “186” 
term in the original published equation to account for 
the slightly lower values of IDMS-standardized cre-
atinine assays compared to assays used in the MDRD 
study. When serum creatinine is measured in SI units 
(mcmol/L), one needs to divide the serum creatinine 
value by 88.5 to convert to mg/dL prior to inserting into 
the equation.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   6 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 7
The MDRD GFR equation differs from the  Cockcroft–
Gault or Ix estimates of the creatinine clearance in several 
ways. First, it was developed from data that measured GFR 
by iothalamate, a substance which is not secreted by the re-
nal tubules, and so it predicts GFR rather than creatinine 
clearance. All else being equal, the MDRD equation will 
give a lower value for renal function (GFR) than creatinine 
clearance, which includes the tubular secretion component 
of renal function. Secondly, the MDRD equation is normal-
ized to body size and is expressed as eGFR/1.73 m
2 of body 
surface area. Creatinine clearance, whether obtained from 
a timed urine sample or from the Ix or Cockcroft–Gault 
equation, is raw renal creatinine clearance that has not 
been adjusted for body size.
b. The CKD-EPI GFR equation.  This is similar to the MDRD
equation, but this newer equation was validated in a
larger group of subjects, particularly those with only mild
degrees of renal impairment. The CKD-EPI equation is
listed in Appendix A. The differences between the two
equations are usually not of clinical importance, as they
occur primarily in patients with GFR levels greater than
60, where the impact of knowing the precise level of renal 
function is not particularly large.
c. Cystatin C equations.  An alternative method of estimating
GFR is based on equations that use the serum cystatin
C level. Cystatin C is a 13-kDa protein produced by all
cells that is filtered by the glomerulus and not reab-
sorbed. The production rate of cystatin C is not related
to muscle mass or dietary meat intake, and cystatin
C–based estimates of GFR correlate better with CKD-
 
related outcomes than creatinine-based equations in
some studies. Some of the newest efforts to predict GFR
combine both serum creatinine and cystatin C levels
(Levey, 2014). Laboratory methods of measuring cystatin 
C are not commonly standardized (this is in progress,
similar to IDMS standardization of creatinine), and for
the moment, cystatin C equations are not in wide use.
6. Problems with estimated clearances in acute kidney injury. The es-
timating equations based on either creatinine or cystatin
are based on steady-state assumptions. If one were to sur -
gically remove both kidneys, the serum creatinine or cys-
tatin C levels would begin to rise, but this would take place 
over a number of days as opposed to immediately. For this
reason, none of the renal function estimating equations
described above are useful in situations where the level of
kidney function is rapidly changing. The timed urine col -
lection method can be used to measure creatinine clear -
ance, but then serum creatinine levels need to be measured 
at both the beginning and end of the collection period,
and the per minute excretion rate should be divided by the 
time-averaged serum value in the calculations.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   7 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
8
C. Ultrasound and serum electrolytes. I n patients found to have CKD, 
one should image the kidneys, commonly by ultrasound, to 
look for structural abnormalities and possible obstruction 
and measure serum electrolytes (Na, K, Cl, HCO3) to screen for 
metabolic acidosis and electrolyte disorders, the presence of 
which may give clues to an underlying renal disease.
D. Looking for an etiologic diagnosis.  I dentifying the underlying 
cause of CKD is important. The CKD may be reversible, for 
example in a patient with bilateral renovascular disease or 
chronic bladder neck obstruction from prostatic hypertrophy. 
The cause of CKD may provide insights into the tempo of dis-
ease progression. Since some etiologies of kidney disease are 
very likely to recur in a future kidney allograft, identifying the 
underlying cause of CKD at the outset may help in later man-
agement decisions.
E. Staging. T he National Kidney Foundation’s (NKF) Kidney Dis-
ease Outcome Quality Initiative’s (KDOQI) staging of CKD has 
been widely adopted. It stages CKD from stage 1 (mildest) to 
stage 5 (most severe) based on the level of eGFR normalized 
to body surface area. The two mildest stages—stages 1 and 2, 
in which the eGFR/1.73 m 2 is still above 60 mL/min—require 
evidence for kidney damage apart from reduced GFR. Kidney 
damage can be manifest as pathologic changes on kidney bi-
opsy; abnormalities in the composition of the blood or urine 
(proteinuria or changes in the urine sediment examination), 
or abnormalities in imaging tests. The more severe stages of 
CKD—stages 3, 4, and 5—are present by definition when the 
GFR is below 60, 30, and 15, respectively. Some elderly patients 
with eGFR/1.73 m 2 in the range of 45–60 mL/min may not 
have obvious kidney damage, nor an increased risk of an ac-
celerated decline in renal function or mortality. A subsequent 
staging system developed by KDIGO (Kidney Disease: Improv-
ing Global Outcomes) partially takes this into account by sub-
dividing stage 3 CKD into two levels: 3a, with eGFR/1.73 m2 in 
the range of 45–59 mL/min; and 3b, with GFR levels between 
30 and 44 mL/min. Also, the newer staging system adds in the 
degree of proteinuria as measured by the UACR. One newer 
staging system is shown in Table 1.2, where a low risk of CKD 
progression and complications is indicated by “green, ” and 
progressively increased risk is indicated by “yellow, ” “orange, ” 
and “red. ”
 II. SLOWING PROGRESSION OF CKD AND OF CARDIOV ASCULAR DISEASE. In 
CKD patients, risk factors for progression of renal disease are 
very similar to those associated with increased cardiovascular 
risk. One purpose of identifying CKD patients early on is to at -
tempt to correct and/or mitigate such risk factors, in the hopes of 
both maintaining GFR and minimizing cardiovascular risk. The 
main risk factors include smoking, high blood pressure, hypergly-
cemia in diabetic patients (and perhaps in nondiabetic persons 
as well), elevated blood lipid levels, anemia, and elevated serum 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   8 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 9
phosphorus levels. Urinary protein excretion and even microal-
buminuria markedly increase both the risk of progression and 
cardiovascular complications. Levels of inflammatory mediators, 
notably C-reactive protein (CRP), are increased in CKD and are 
associated with increased atherosclerotic risk.
A. Cessation of smoking.  Smoking is a traditional cardiovascular 
risk factor, and cessation of smoking is important in terms of 
limiting cardiovascular risk. Evidence suggests that smoking 
accelerates the rate of progression of renal disease, emphasiz-
ing the importance of stopping smoking by CKD patients.
B. Control of blood pressure and proteinuria. The blood pressure target 
in CKD patients is evolving. The target blood pressure rec-
ommended by KDIGO and KDOQI is < 130/80 mm Hg for all 
patients with kidney disease, those with and those without 
diabetes, regardless of degree of proteinuria. However, the 
Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC 8) guidelines published 
in 2013 recommend a less aggressive blood pressure target of 
<140/90 mm Hg in patients under age 60 with diabetes and 
kidney disease. Whether or not hypertension is present, use of 
an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor/angiotensin re-
ceptor blocker (ACE-I/ARB) is recommended to slow the rate 
of progression in patients with diabetic kidney disease as well 
as in nondiabetic CKD patients with proteinuria (spot urine 
 protein-to-creatinine ratio of ≥ 200 mg/g). Thiazide diuretics 
are the diuretic of choice for mild CKD, when SCr is <1.8 mg/dL 
(<160 mcmol/L). When S Cr is > 1.8 mg/dL (> 160 mcmol/L), 
Prognosis of CKD by GFR and Albuminuria Categories 
(KDIGO 2012)1.2
TABLE
eGFR 
category eGFR/1.73 m2
Normal 
to mildly 
increased
Moderately 
increased
Severely 
increased
<3 mg/mmol 3–30 mg/mmol >30 mg/mmol
<30 mg/g 30–300 mg/g >300 mg/g
1* ≥90 Green Yellow Orange
2* 60–89 Green Yellow Orange
3a 45–49 Yellow Orange Red
3b 30–44 Orange Red Red
4 15–29 Red Red Red
5 <15 on 
dialysis
Red Red Red
Colors denote the following: green = no risk if no other markers for kidney disease, no CKD; 
 yellow = moderately increased risk; orange = high risk; red = very high risk.
*Not CKD unless hematuria or structural or pathological changes present.  Risk of progression may 
be moderately high with certain causes of kidney disease.
Modified from Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. KDIGO 2012 
Clinical 
 Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney 
Int Suppl. 2013;3:1–150.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   9 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
10
a loop diuretic (twice-a-day dosing regimen) is recommended, 
due to presumed reduced efficacy of thiazides under those cir-
cumstances; however, lack of efficacy of thiazides in patients 
with reduced GFR has been challenged. Chlorthalidone, a 
longer-acting thiazide diuretic, is effective in CKD in causing 
volume reduction (Agarwal, 2014), to the point that volume 
depletion–related side effects were observed.
Doses of ACE-Is/ARBs can be titrated up to minimize pro-
teinuria, but blood pressure, potassium, and creatinine should 
be monitored after initiation of therapy and after each dose 
change. Sodium restriction and use of diuretics increase the 
antiproteinuric effects of ACE-I/ARB therapy. ACE-Is or ARBs 
are contraindicated in patients who are pregnant, particularly 
beyond the first trimester, and in patients with a history of 
angioedema. For patients with an eGFR/1.73 m 2 of > 15 mL/
min, one rarely needs to adjust the dose of antihypertensive 
drugs downward due to impaired renal excretion, although the 
plasma half-life of some classes of antihypertensives will be in-
creased (see Chapter 33).
C. Beta-blockers and aspirin: Cardioprotective effects.  Beta-blockers 
provide cardioprotection in CKD patients, although they are 
no longer recommended by JNC 8 (Eight Joint National Com-
mittee) as a first-line drug in treating hypertension. Aspirin 
and beta-blocker cardioprotection after myocardial infarction 
is similar in CKD patients and in patients with normal renal 
function. Aspirin has been associated with GI bleeding in end-
stage kidney disease (ESKD) patients. Whether an increased 
risk is present in stages 1–4 CKD patients is not well known.
D. Strict glycemic control in diabetic patients with CKD.  St udies in pa -
tients with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes have demonstrated 
that tight glycemic control slows the development of micro -
vascular and macrovascular disease. Tight glycemic control 
also slows the rate of progression of renal disease in diabetic 
patients with CKD. The goal of glycemic control should be a 
HbA1C of <7.0%, although the latest ADA guidelines have em-
phasized individualization of the HbA1C threshold in patients 
with type 2 diabetes, and KDIGO guidelines have suggested 
that this target be relaxed in patients at risk of hypoglycemia 
or with substantial comorbidities.
E. Lipid-lowering therapy . E levated levels of low-density lipopro-
tein (LDL) cholesterol and other lipid marker molecules are 
a traditional risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and the 
cardioprotective effects of statins in non-CKD patients, even 
when cholesterol levels are in the normal range, have been 
described in several studies. Data in animals suggest that 
high lipid levels and cholesterol loading may augment glo-
merular injury. Thus, treatment of CKD patients with statins 
to reduce lipids may both prevent progression and lower car -
diovascular risk. The latest American College of Cardiology 
(ACC) and American Heart Association (AHA) lipid guide-
lines (Goff, 2014; Stone, 2013), which are targeted toward the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   10 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 11
general population and not toward CKD, identify four groups 
of patients for primary and secondary prevention using 
statins.
1. Individuals with clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease
2. Individuals with LDL cholesterol levels of ≥190 mg/dL
(4.9 mmol/L)
3. Diabetic patients without cardiovascular disease aged
 40–75 years old with LDL cholesterol levels between 70 and 
189 mg/dL (1.8 and 4.9 mmol/L)
4. Patients without evidence of cardiovascular disease, and
LDL cholesterol level 70–189 mg/dL (1.8–4.9 mmol/L),
and a 10-year risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease 
≥7.5%.
CKD patients theoretically could be treated according to 
the same scheme, although using the AHA risk calculator (see 
the spreadsheet AHA risk calculator hyperlink attached to the 
reference listing for Goff [2014]), almost all patients greater 
than 63 years of age, even with the calculator’s “optimal levels” 
of systolic blood pressure, LDL and HDL cholesterol, and with-
out diabetes, will have a 10-year cardiovascular risk > 7.5%, 
even in the absence of CKD. Thus, these guidelines have been 
questioned regarding their rather intensive recommendations 
for use of statin therapy.
The 2013 KDIGO lipid guidelines recommend that all 
CKD patients (eGFR/1.73 m
2 < 60) not on dialysis and ≥50 
years of age be treated with either a statin or a statin/ ezetimibe 
combination. Patients ≥50 years of age who have CKD by vir -
tue of some evidence of renal damage but with eGFR/1.73 m 2 
≥60, namely stage 1 or 2 CKD, should be offered statin treat-
ment only, as evidence for the benefits of a statin/ezetimibe 
combination in this group is not strong. Finally, younger CKD 
(age 18–49) not on dialysis should be treated with statins if 
they have known coronary disease, diabetes mellitus, prior 
ischemic stroke, or a 10-year CV risk greater than 10%. The 
2013 KDIGO lipid guidelines recommend that statins or the 
statin/ezetimibe combination should not be initiated rou-
tinely in dialysis patients, but if the patients are already on 
these drugs when dialysis is initiated, then these drugs should 
be continued.
In nondialysis CKD patients, the benefits of these “lipid-
lowering” drugs seem to be present regardless of the level of 
LDL cholesterol, and the current trend is to use overall car -
diovascular risk and presence of comorbidity rather than LDL 
cholesterol levels as an indication for treatment. For a more 
complete discussion of treatment of dyslipidemias in stage 5 
CKD patients receiving dialysis, see Chapter 38.
1. Statins: Cardioprotective effects.  The cardioprotective effects
of statins, well documented in nonuremic patients, are
controversial in dialysis patients, but effectiveness ap -
pears to be present in nondialysis CKD, and statin use has
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   11 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
12
been shown to retard progression of CKD in some studies 
( Deedwania, 2014).
a. Dose adjustment for renal insufficiency.  Statins as a class
have been associated with rhabdomyolysis, and dose re-
duction in severe renal impairment is recommended for
some statins (e.g., rosuvastatin) or when statins are used 
in combination with fibrates (Chapter 38).
2. Ezetimibe. Ezetimibe is an inhibitor of cholesterol absorp -
tion, and it decreases plasma levels of LDL cholesterol,
triglycerides, and apolipoprotein B, and increases plasma
levels of HDL cholesterol. As with statins, ezetimibe exerts
significant antiatherogenic, anti-inflammatory, and antiox-
idant actions (Katsiki, 2013). The SHARP trial, where both
nondialysis and dialysis patients were given a combination 
of simvastatin and ezetimibe (Sharp Collaborative Group,
2010), forms the basis of the recommendation to use ezeti-
mibe in nondialysis CKD patients. However, it is not clear
to what extent the benefits found were due to the statin
(simvastatin) used, and to what extent, if any, the addition
of ezetimibe contributed to the treatment benefit that was
found.
F. Protein restriction. Dietary protein restriction as a treatment to 
slow CKD progression remains controversial. Evidence from 
animal studies demonstrates that diets high in protein lead 
to histologic abnormalities in the kidney and to proteinuria. 
Furthermore, restricting protein intake slows progression. 
However, randomized clinical trials suggest that the effects 
of protein restriction are likely to be small and difficult to 
achieve. Nonetheless, evidence does support some benefit 
and indeed meta-analyses suggest that protein restriction is 
beneficial in reducing CKD progression. One reasonable ap-
proach is to restrict protein intake to about 0.8 g/kg per day in 
all patients with CKD. Recommendations differ from various 
guideline groups regarding the benefits of any further restric -
tion of 
 protein intake. The 2000 KDOQI guidelines suggested 
a restriction to 0.6 g/kg per day in those with a eGFR/1.73 m 2 
<25  mL/min might be beneficial, but in general, Canadian, 
many European, and the most recent KDIGO guidelines do 
not recommend protein restriction below 0.8 g/kg per day 
at any level of renal function. One needs to apply judgment 
when restricting protein intake, especially in malnourished 
CKD patients. Patients who are malnourished at the start 
of dialysis have a poorer survival than their well-nourished 
counterparts, and restricting food choices always carries the 
risk of a worsening nutritional status. Close follow-up for any 
evidence of malnutrition, either by clinical parameters or by 
serum albumin, is essential. A dietitian should be 
 monitoring 
such  patients carefully. The recommended caloric intake 
is 30–35 kcal/kg per day. In stage 4 and 5 patients, evidence 
of failing nutritional status is one key determinant in the 
 decision to begin dialysis therapy.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   12 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 13
III. MANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATIONS OF CKD.
A. Correction of anemia.  Anemia is common in CKD patients. As
kidney disease advances, the incidence and prevalence of 
anemia increase. Anemia of CKD is multifactorial in etiology. 
The most common causes are erythropoietin deficiency, iron 
deficiency, and inflammation. Observational studies have sug-
gested an increased risk of cardiovascular and renal complica-
tions, lower quality of life, and higher mortality with a lower 
Hb level. However, large randomized clinical trials have dem-
onstrated that correction of anemia to a Hb level of 13 g/dL 
(130 g/L) and above with an erythropoiesis-stimulating agent 
(ESA) is associated with either no benefit or an increased risk 
of cardiovascular complications, stroke, and/or death. Also, 
correction of anemia is associated with either no effect on kid-
ney progression or an increased rate of ESKD. Recent studies 
have found an association between exposure to high doses of 
ESA and heightened risk of adverse events. It is not clear to 
what extent this is causal or a reflection of the relatively high 
Hb targets used and the known association of ESA resistance 
with poor outcome. Contemporary approaches to anemia 
management have now emphasize only partial correction of 
anemia, using the lowest possible dose of ESA, together with 
treatment of iron deficiency and inflammation.
1. Initiation of ESA therapy and Hb thresholds. Diagnosis and man-
agement of anemia in nondialysis CKD patients is similar
to that in ESKD and is discussed in detail in Chapter 34.
The KDIGO guidelines recommend that erythropoietin
therapy should not be started until the hemoglobin falls
below 10 g/dL (100 g/L). KDIGO guidelines recommend to
maintain the hemoglobin level between 9 and 11.5 g/dL (90 
and 115 g/L), although the US FDA now recommends that
ESA dosing should be reduced or interrupted if the Hb level 
exceeds 11 g/dL (110 g/L). Treatment of anemia in CKD
with ESA therapy should be individualized, and one of the
main goals should be to reduce the need for blood transfu-
sion. The KDIGO guidelines counsel caution when treating 
CKD patients with a history of prior stroke or cancer. Thus, 
the effective Hb goal, in the United States at least, is 9–11
g/dL (90–110 g/L). Controversy exists as to whether a Hb
level of 9 g/dL (90 g/L) may be too low in CKD patients,
since this might increase use of blood transfusion and ex -
pose patients eligible for kidney transplantation to the al -
losensitizing effects of transfused blood.
2. Types of ESA therapy. There are short-acting and long-acting
ESAs. Epoetin alfa, approved in 1989 and available world-
wide, is a short-acting ESA with a half-life when given in-
travenously of about 8 hours and 16–24 hours when given
subcutaneously. Several different short-acting ESAs and
their biosimilars are available in non-US markets. A typi-
cal dose in a CKD patient might be 4,000–6,000 units sub-
cut. once a week. The most widely used long-acting ESA is
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   13 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
14
darbepoetin alfa with a half-life of about 25–50 hours when 
given IV or subcut., respectively. The optimal administra-
tion dosing schedule for darbepoetin alfa is once weekly (a 
typical dose might be 20–30 mcg) or every 2 weeks (40–60 
mcg) in a stable CKD patient. The dose does not differ if 
given by intravenous route or subcutaneous route. Outside 
of the United States, another long-acting ESA has been ap-
proved and marketed for use; this is Continuous Erythro-
poietin Receptor Activator (CERA), which is a compound 
where a water-soluble polyethylene glycol (PEG) moiety 
has been added to the epoetin beta molecule. The half-life 
is approximately 136 hours. CERA is recommended to be 
administered every 2 weeks for correction of anemia and 
then once a month during the maintenance phase (typical 
dose 150 mcg/month).
3. Frequency of administration and route of administration of ESAs. The
frequency of ESA administration is usually influenced by
patient convenience and efficacy considerations. In non -
dialysis CKD patients, longer-acting ESAs are preferred
because their use is associated with fewer injections and/
or visits to a doctor’s office for administration in the event
that a patient cannot self-administer, but the shorter-
acting ESAs can be dosed once a week, or even once every
2 weeks, with considerable effect.
4. Resistant anemia.  Patients may be classified as having ESA
hyporesponsiveness if they have no increase in Hb level
from baseline after the first month of ESA treatment on
appropriate weight-based dosing. The KDIGO Work Group 
recommends that in these patients, escalation of ESA dose 
should not go beyond double the initial weight-based dose; 
further, KDIGO recommends avoiding maximal doses no
greater than four times initial weight-based appropriate
doses. In patients with initial or acquired ESA hypore-
sponsiveness, evaluation for specific causes of poor ESA
response should be undertaken.
B. Correction of iron deficiency.  Iron deficiency is present in over 
40% of patients with CKD not on dialysis and is the most com-
mon cause of apparent ESA resistance. The causes of iron de-
ficiency are multifactorial but include reduced absorption of 
iron; blood loss from either frequent blood draws or occult GI 
blood loss, and reduced nutritional intake.
1. Assessment of iron deficiency.  Iron status (iron stores and
bioavailable iron levels) should be evaluated regularly in
patients with CKD. Ferritin is an iron storage protein and
its serum levels reflect iron storage. Serum ferritin is also
an acute phase reactant, however, and patients with CKD
often exhibit chronic inflammation; therefore, the ferritin
level should be interpreted cautiously in inflamed patients. 
Serum ferritin values are of greatest predictive value for
iron deficiency when low (<100 ng/mL), but are of limited
value when elevated. The transferrin saturation (TSAT;
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   14 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 15
serum iron × 100 / total iron binding capacity) is the most 
common method of measuring iron bioavailability. A TSAT 
<20% is indicative of low iron availability in CKD. Iron de-
ficiency can lead to decreased effectiveness of ESA therapy, 
and iron therapy without ESA therapy is usually unsuccess-
ful in patients with CKD. Therefore, before initiating ESA 
therapy, iron status must be addressed.
2. T reatment of iron deficiency anemia.  O ptions for therapy de -
pend on the stage of CKD and include oral and intrave-
nous therapies. Oral iron therapy is the preferred method 
of treating nondialysis CKD patients and is recommended 
by KDIGO as an initial approach to treating iron deficiency. 
Strategies to improve oral iron absorption include only tak-
ing pills on an empty stomach, avoiding enteric-coated for-
mulations, and avoiding ingestion of iron with phosphate 
binders. Intravenous iron may be needed in some patients 
who either do not respond to oral iron or have large ongoing 
losses of iron (e.g., chronic bleeding from the gastrointesti-
nal tract). The use of low-molecular-weight iron therapy is 
recommended—low-molecular-weight dextrans, ferrous 
gluconate, iron sucrose, or ferumoxytol. The use of high-
molecular-weight iron dextran has been associated with 
an increased risk of severe anaphylaxis.
Dosing strategies for oral iron aim at providing 
approximately 200 mg of elemental iron daily, which is 
equivalent to ferrous sulfate 325 mg three times daily; each 
pill providing 65  mg of elemental iron. If iron repletion 
goals are not met after a 1–3 month trial, it is appropri-
ate to consider intravenous iron supplementation. Intra -
venous iron can be administered as a single large dose or 
as repeated smaller doses, depending on the preparation 
used. The initial course of intravenous iron treatment 
is to supply approximately 1,000 mg of iron. This may be 
repeated if the initial course of treatment fails to increase 
Hb level and/or decrease ESA dose. Iron status should be 
monitored every 3 months with TSAT and ferritin while a 
patient is receiving ESA therapy and more frequently when 
initiating or increasing ESA dose, in the setting of ongoing 
blood loss, or in circumstances where iron stores are likely 
to become depleted.
C. Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD).  The 
pathogenesis of CKD-MBD is depicted in Figure 1.1. The man-
agement of serum phosphorus, vitamin D, and parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) levels in dialysis patients is fully discussed 
in Chapter 36 and only issues pertinent to CKD will be dis-
cussed here.
1. Hyperphosphatemia. A h igh serum phosphorus level is a risk 
factor for mortality and adverse cardiovascular outcomes 
in both CKD and ESKD patients. Even in nonuremic pa-
tients, mild serum phosphorus elevation is associated 
with increased cardiovascular risk. Hyperphosphatemia 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   15 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
16
is associated with increased risk of vascular calcification 
and left ventricular hypertrophy in ESKD. In a number of 
experimental renal failure models, hyperphosphatemia 
accelerates progression of renal failure. In such models, 
hyperphosphatemia stimulates parathyroid gland growth 
and PTH secretion.
a. Dietary management.  M anagement includes a careful di -
etary review to look for abnormally high consumption of 
foods rich in phosphorus, including dairy products, cer -
tain colas, and processed meats. A careful review of the 
diet should be made with the goal of reducing consump-
tion of foods containing phosphorus additives. Phospho-
rus intake should be restricted to 800–1,000 mg per day 
(26–32 mmol per day).
b. Target serum calcium and phosphorus levels.  P revious rec -
ommendations to maintain serum calcium at the high 
end of the normal range to ensure PTH suppression have 
been replaced by a strategy of keeping serum calcium to-
ward the middle or low range of normal, to minimize the 
risk of vascular calcification. Similarly serum phospho -
rus levels should be maintained within the normal range.
c. Phosphorus binders.  P hosphorus binders may need to be 
used. The choices are described in Chapter 36. It is pru-
dent to restrict total calcium intake in CKD patients to 
about 1,500 mg per day (37 mmol per day) (KDOQI guide-
lines are less restrictive and suggest a ceiling of 2,000 
mg per day [50 mmol per day]), to minimize the risk of 
vascular calcification. This means that if calcium salts 
are used as phosphorus binders, they may need to be 
combined with sevelamer, lanthanum, or, possibly, mag-
nesium or one of the newer iron-containing phosphorus 
binders described in Chapter 36. Aluminum-containing 
FIGURE 1.1 Pathogenesis of MBD.  (Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers 
Ltd: Nigwekar SU, Tamez H, Thadhani RI. Vitamin D and chronic kidney disease-mineral 
bone disease (CKD-MBD). Bonekey Rep. 2014;3:498. eCollection 2014.)
Chronic kidney disease
Reduced renal phosphorus clearance
Hyperphosphatemia Increased FGF-23
Hypocalcemia
Reduced 
1,25 (OH)2 vitamin D
Vitamin D
resistance
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Calcidiol 
deficiency
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   16 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 17
phosphorus binders generally should not be used. Use 
of sevelamer as a phosphorus binder has been shown 
to perhaps stabilize the rate of vascular calcification in 
CKD patients and to improve outcomes, although stud-
ies are not definitive in this area. It has been argued that 
if there is a beneficial effect, it may be due partially to the 
lipid-lowering effects of sevelamer, and sevelamer may 
have additional anti-
 inflammatory effects and may act 
to reduce FGF23 ( fibroblast growth factor 23), a com-
pound found in markedly increased concentration in the 
blood in CKD that also is associated with poor outcome. 
This remains an active area of ongoing research.
2. Serum parathyroid hormone levels. Control of serum PTH levels 
is important to minimize the degree of parathyroid gland
hypertrophy and the risk of developing large, nonsuppress-
ible glands. Hyperparathyroidism is associated with bone
disease, and PTH may also act as a uremic toxin with ad-
verse effects on many different organ systems. The control
of PTH secretion is detailed in Chapter 36.
a. Frequency of measurement.  The 2009 KDIGO clinical prac-
tice guidelines for bone metabolism and disease in CKD
recommend measuring PTH levels, as well as serum cal-
cium and phosphorus, in all patients with a eGFR/1.73 m
2
<60 mL/min, though this may not be necessary in elderly
patients with eGFR/1.73 m 2 in the 40–65 mL/min range
and few risk factors for progression of CKD. The frequency 
of these measurements should be every 12  months for
eGFR/1.73 m
2 values between 30 and  45–60 mL/min, and
every 3 months when eGFR/1.73 m 2 is between 15 and
30 mL/min.
b. Target range of PTH. The intact PTH assay has been avail-
able since 1990 and identifies both 1–84 and 7–84 PTH,
and most bone biopsy studies on which target levels are
based have employed this assay. Bio-intact PTH, also
known as biPTH or whole PTH, is a newer assay that
responds only to the complete 1–84 PTH molecule, re-
sulting in PTH values that are about half as high as those 
measured by the previous “intact” PTH assay. Either
assay can be employed for diagnosis and treatment of
hyperparathyroidism in CKD, but the target PTH range
will depend on the specific assay employed. As CKD
progresses, the bone becomes resistant to the actions of
PTH, and so the target PTH range increases. The initial
KDOQI recommendations proposed various targets for
PTH at different levels of renal impairment, but given the 
wide variation among assays and uncertainty of benefit,
the 2009 KDIGO guidelines simply recommend that for
nondialysis CKD, assay-specific elevated levels of PTH be 
investigated, and treated with vitamin D if found to be
persistently high and/or increasing. In dialysis patients,
a target PTH range of 2–9 times normal is proposed as
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   17 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
18
being desirable. In nondialysis CKD patients, the recom-
mended first-line treatment of elevated PTH levels is rec-
ommended to be vitamin D therapy.
3. Serum alkaline phosphatase.  Alkaline phosphatase is present
in bone and is an indicator of bone turnover rate. When
high, particularly in combination with elevated serum
PTH, serum alkaline phosphatase can be a reasonably good 
indicator of a hyperactive parathyroid gland that needs to
be suppressed. The current KDIGO CKD-MBD guidelines
recommend at least yearly monitoring of serum alkaline
phosphatase levels for stage 4 CKD and higher.
4. Vitamin D. In CKD patients, 25-D levels are quite low, prob-
ably because of lack of sunlight exposure and low ingestion 
of vitamin D–containing foods. As CKD progresses, the
rate of conversion of 25-D to 1,25-D by the 1-α-hydroxylase 
enzyme diminishes, and even with adequate 25-D levels,
serum 1,25-D levels may be reduced and PTH suppression
may be inadequate. Vitamin D affects multiple organ sys-
tems; most of these effects are beneficial, although excess
vitamin D has been associated with vascular calcification
and even accelerated renal failure. The 1-α-hydroxylase en-
zyme exists in various tissues, suggesting that it may be im-
portant to ensure proper levels of both 25-D and 1,25-D in
the circulation for optimum health. Recently active vitamin 
D sterol administration has been linked to improved sur -
vival and improved cardiovascular outcomes in ESKD pa-
tients. The mechanism of this survival benefit is not clear,
and these are observational studies that need to be con-
firmed. In addition, in small randomized trials, vitamin D
treatment has been shown to reduce proteinuria and slow
progression of CKD (Palmer and Strippoli, 2013), and vita-
min D also may improve ESA sensitivity and reduce anemia 
by reducing inflammation.
a. Target serum levels of 25-D in CKD.  Serum levels of 25-D
should be at least 30 ng/mL (75 nmol/L). Low serum lev-
els of 25-D have been linked to severe muscle weakness
in elderly nonuremic patients. Because CKD patients
typically have very low levels of 25-D in the serum, for
primary prevention, CKD patients should be supple -
mented with at least 1,000–2,000 IU of cholecalciferol per 
day, and higher doses may be needed. Cholecalciferol is
available in the United States only as an over-the-
 counter 
vitamin supplement. This level of cholecalciferol supple-
mentation does not affect GI absorption of calcium or
phosphorus. To treat a low serum 25-D level, the 2003
KDOQI bone disease guidelines recommended using
ergocalciferol, which is slightly less effective than chole-
calciferol and is available only in relatively large dosage
forms designed to be prescribed weekly or monthly. Er -
gocalciferol does have the advantage in the United States 
of being available as a formulary drug.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   18 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 19
b. When to use active vitamin D preparations. In the more severe 
stages of CKD, conversion of 25-D to 1,25-D in the kid-
ney becomes suboptimal, and even with adequate stores 
of 25-D, the serum levels of 1,25-D may remain low. In
such situations, PTH often is not adequately suppressed. 
In stages 3 and 4 CKD patients in whom serum PTH re-
mains above the target range despite adequate serum
levels of 25-D, the use of an active vitamin D preparation 
is indicated. Choices and doses of active vitamin D prep-
arations (e.g., calcitriol, paricalcitol, and doxercalciferol) 
are outlined in Chapter 36. As in ESKD patients, when
active vitamin D sterols are being given, the dose should 
be held or reduced in the presence of hypercalcemia or
hyperphosphatemia.
5. Cinacalcet. Cinacalcet is a calcimimetic drug that increases 
the sensitivity of calcium receptors on the parathyroid
gland to calcium, resulting in a decrease in PTH secretion.
One main advantage of cinacalcet is its use in patients
with hyperparathyroidism and high serum calcium and/
or phosphorus levels, where use of active vitamin D sterols 
to suppress PTH would be contraindicated (active vitamin
D sterols increase GI absorption of phosphorus and may
worsen hyperphosphatemia). Cinacalcet has been shown
to lower PTH levels in stages 3 and 4 CKD patients. The
relative roles of cinacalcet versus active vitamin D sterols
for PTH suppression in predialysis patients are not yet well 
defined. In the United States, product labeling of cinacalcet 
states that the drug is not indicated for use in nondialysis
patients and the 2009 KDIGO CKD-MBD guidelines do not
recommend its use in the nondialysis CKD population.
D. Electrolyte and acid–base complications.  A variety of electrolyte 
abnormalities may become apparent as kidney function de -
clines. The most prominent is hyperkalemia. Acidosis can 
also develop although it is generally mild and usually with a 
normal anion gap until kidney function is severely impaired. 
Treatment of acute hyperkalemia is discussed elsewhere. In 
the chronic setting, hyperkalemia usually is the result of rela-
tively high dietary potassium intake, and especially, binge in-
take of high potassium foods such as fruits. Hyperkalemia is 
also more commonly found in patients taking ACE inhibitors 
or angiotensin receptor blockers or mineralocorticoid recep-
tor antagonists such as aldosterone. It also is more common in 
patients taking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as well 
as trimethoprim. The recent development of novel gastroin-
testinal sorbents to prevent absorption of ingested potassium 
may allow more widespread use of renin–angiotensin aldoste-
rone system (RAAS) antagonists.
Chronic metabolic acidosis results in increased resorp-
tion of bone, and also has been associated with an increased 
rate of progression of CKD. The use of sodium bicarbonate 
is recommended to maintain the serum bicarbonate level at 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   19 09/10/14   1:00 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
20
≥22 mmol/L. The usual amount of sodium bicarbonate to give 
is 0.5–1.0 mmol/kg per day. Alkali therapy has been shown to 
slow the rate of progression of CKD in several small random-
ized trials.
 I V. PREP ARING A PATIENT FOR DIALYSIS.  T asks here include preparation 
for dialysis or preemptive kidney transplantation; placement of 
vascular or peritoneal access; choosing the most appropriate 
mode and location of dialysis (i.e., peritoneal dialysis, outpatient 
hemodialysis center, home hemodialysis); vaccinations; contin -
ued nutritional management, particularly in terms of phospho -
rus control; and prevention of fluid overload and hypertension. 
These are discussed in more detail in the next chapter.
References and Suggested Readings
Agarwal R, et al. Chlorthalidone for poorly controlled hypertension in chronic kidney 
disease: an interventional pilot study. Am J Nephrol. 2014;39:171–182.
American Diabetes Association. Executive summary: standards of medical care in 
diabetes—2012. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(suppl 1):S4–S10.
Brown DL, Masselink AJ, Lalla CD. Functional range of creatinine clearance for renal 
drug dosing: a practical solution to the controversy of which weight to use in the 
Cockcroft-Gault equation. Ann Pharmacother. 2013;47:1039–1044.
Daugirdas JT, ed. Handbook of Chronic Kidney Disease Management. Wolters Kluwer; 
Philadelphia, 2011.
Deedwania PC. Statins in chronic kidney disease: cardiovascular risk and kidney func-
tion. Postgrad Med. 2014;126:29–36.
Eckardt KU, et al. Evolving importance of kidney disease: from subspecialty to global 
health burden. Lancet. 2013;382:158–169.
Fink HA, et al. Screening for, monitoring, and treatment of chronic kidney disease 
stages 1 to 3: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and 
for an American College of Physicians Clinical Practice Guideline. Ann Intern Med. 
2012;156:570–581.
Goff DC Jr, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Assessment of Cardiovascular 
Risk: J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63;2935–2959. Downloadable CV Risk calculator in 
Excel format: http://static.heart.org/ahamah/risk/Omnibus_Risk_Estimator.xls. 
 Accessed April 28, 2014.
Ix JH, et al. Equations to estimate creatinine excretion rate: the CKD epidemiology 
collaboration. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:184–191.
James PA, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of high blood 
pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint 
National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA 2014;311:507–520.
Katsiki N, et al. Ezetimibe therapy for dyslipidemia: an update. Curr Pharm Des. 
2013;19:3107–3114.
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Anemia Work Group. KDIGO 
Clinical Practice Guideline for Anemia in Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney Int 
Suppl. 2012;2:279–335.
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD-MBD Work Group. 
KDIGO clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis, evaluation, prevention, and 
treatment of chronic kidney disease-mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD). 
 Kidney Int. 2009;76(suppl 113):S1–S130.
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes Lipid Guideline Development Work 
Group Members. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Lipid Management in 
CKD: summary of recommendation statements and clinical approach to the 
 patient. Kidney Int Suppl. 2013;3:259–305.
Levey AS, et al. The definition, classification, and prognosis of chronic kidney disease: 
a KDIGO Controversies Conference report. Kidney Int. 2011;80:7–28.
Levey AS, Coresh J. Chronic kidney disease. Lancet. 2012;379:165–180
Levey AS, Inker LA, Coresh J. GFR estimation: from physiology to public health. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 2014;63:820–834.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   20 09/10/14   1:00 am
Chapter 1 / Approach to Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease, Stages 1–4 21
Macgregor MS, Methven S. Assessing kidney function. In: Daugirdas JT, ed. Hand -
book of Chronic Kidney Disease Management. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 
2011:1–18.
National Kidney Foundation (NKF). KDOQI clinical practice guidelines for bone me-
tabolism and disease in chronic kidney disease. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42(4 suppl 
3):S1–S201.
Palmer SC, Strippoli GF. Proteinuria: does vitamin D treatment improve outcomes in 
CKD? Nat Rev Nephrol. 2013;9:638–640.
Ptinopoulou AG, Pikilidou MI, Lasaridis AN. The effect of antihypertensive drugs on 
chronic kidney disease: a comprehensive review. Hypertens Res. 2013;36:91–101.
Sharp Collaborative Group. Study of Heart and Renal Protection (SHARP): randomized 
trial to assess the effects of lowering low-density lipoprotein cholesterol among 
9,438 patients with chronic kidney disease. Am Heart J. 2010;160:785–794.
Stone NJ, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to 
reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2014;129(25 suppl 2):S1–S45.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch001.indd   21 09/10/14   1:00 am