22
2
Once a patient has reached stage 4 chronic kidney disease (CKD), with 
size-adjusted estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR/1.73 m 2) of 
<30 mL/min, he or she should be under a nephrologist’s care. Ide-
ally, the patient should also be a part of a multidisciplinary predialy-
sis program that includes patient and family education, early choice 
of appropriate renal replacement modality, and, if dialysis is being 
considered, elective creation of dialysis access. The advantage of a 
programmatic approach to care is a planned outpatient initiation of 
dialysis in a patient who is both mentally and physically prepared. It 
is likely that this approach results in fewer hospital days in the first 
month after beginning dialysis and substantial cost savings.
I. CHOICE OF MODALITY
A. Patient education. Of key importance is patient education about 
the various treatment options available in the event that 
renal replacement therapy will become necessary. Would the 
patient best benefit from some form of dialysis, from preemp-
tive transplantation, or from continued conservative manage-
ment? In some cases, due to extreme patient debility or other 
reasons, dialysis may not be an appropriate option, and con-
servative management may be the best choice. These discus-
sions are best initiated once a patient is still in stage 4 CKD, 
and well before stage 5 has been reached.
B. Options for renal replacement therapy (Table 2.1)
1. Preemptive transplantation.  Transplantation offers survival
superior to the standard forms of dialysis being offered
today. Transplantation may not be indicated, however,
for a patient who has severe problems with compliance in
terms of medications. Preemptive transplantation has a
higher success rate in general than when transplantation
is initiated after hemodialysis (Kallab, 2010), and for this
reason, discussions about the feasibility of transplantation
and transplantation workup should begin well in advance
of any need for dialysis, usually when eGFR/1.73 m
2 is still
well above 10 mL/min (Kupin, 2011).
Management of 
CKD Stages 4 and 5: 
Preparation for 
Transplantation, Dialysis, 
or Conservative Care
Ajay Singh and Jameela Kari
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   22 09/10/14   1:01 am
23Chapter 2 / Management of CKD Stages 4 and 5
Modality Description Advantages Disadvantages
Preemptive 
transplantation
Live or cadaver 
donor transplant 
before ever 
needing dialysis
Improved patient 
survival relative to 
conventional dialysis; 
lower long-term costs.
Logistics of 
finding a suitable 
donor; need for 
compliance with 
immunosuppressive 
drugs.
Home 
hemodialysis
3–6 times per 
week, either 
during the day 
or at night. 
Usually assisted 
by a relative 
or caregiver; 
uncommonly, 
by a paid 
health-care 
professional
When given more than 
3 times per week, or 
when given as 8–10-hour 
treatments, 3–3.5 nights 
per week, evidence 
suggests better quality-
of-life and better control 
of phosphate and blood 
pressure; may also 
reduce left ventricular 
hypertrophy
Home is changed 
into a hospital; 
partner burnout; 
with some 
home therapies, 
modification 
to home water 
systems is required; 
waste disposal; 
expense
Home PD Automated 
cycler, with most 
exchanges done 
during the night
Independence, relative 
simplicity
Need for delivery 
of large volumes of 
PD fluid; exposure 
to high amounts of 
glucose
In-center 
nocturnal 
hemodialysis
Three 7–9-
hour nocturnal 
treatments 
per week (or 
uncommonly, 
every other 
night) given in-
center (either 
staff assisted or 
self-care)
Marked increase in 
weekly dialysis time 
with better control 
of phosphate, blood 
pressure, and anemia. 
Home does not need 
to be converted into 
a clinic. Dialysis time 
spent sleeping
Leaving home 
unattended on 
dialysis nights; 
travel to unit; 
relatively inflexible 
schedule
In-center 
conventional 
hemodialysis
Either staff 
assisted (the 
norm) or 
self-care
Short amount of time 
spent on dialysis. Staff 
does all the work
Travel to unit; 
relatively inflexible 
schedule. May be 
inadequate amount 
of dialysis
Postponing 
dialysis
Very-low-
protein diet plus 
ketoanalogues, 
careful fluid 
management
May work to postpone 
dialysis for about 1 year 
in elderly patients with 
few comorbidities (no 
heart failure, diabetes)
Expense of 
ketoanalogues
Treatment Options in Patients Who Need Renal  
Replacement Therapy2.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   23 09/10/14   1:01 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
24
2. Dialysis: Home versus in-center therapy.  Among the end-stage
renal disease (ESRD) therapies, the choices made will de-
pend on what is available in the local community. One of
the main decisions to be made is whether the patient will
be coming in to a clinic for regular dialysis (hemodialysis
in this case), or whether he or she would prefer the inde-
pendence of dialyzing at home, using either a home he-
modialysis system or peritoneal dialysis (PD). Obviously
transportation issues are very important here, as is the
status of a patient’s home, the amount of support avail-
able through interested family members who might assist
as caregivers, and technical issues such as available water
quality and electricity.
In observational studies, mortality rates are lower in 
home hemodialysis patients than in in-center hemodi -
alysis patients, sometimes dramatically so, even after ad -
justments for common comorbidities and at similar total 
weekly dialysis times. Some of this home dialysis advantage 
may be due to unaccounted for patient selection bias, as 
patients undertaking the responsibility to dialyze at home 
usually have a strong positive attitude, good compliance, 
and strong caregiver and/or family support structure, fac-
tors which are associated in their own right with increased 
survival. Mortality rates for in-center hemodialysis are sim-
ilar to those for home PD, so the selection of home versus 
in-center modality should be based primarily on patient 
preferences versus any anticipated survival benefit.
3. “Short daily” hemodialysis. Normally, whether done at home or 
in-center, hemodialysis therapy is offered 3 times per week,
usually 3–5 hours per session. When the same amount of
dialysis time is broken up into five or six sessions per week,
some observational studies have shown better control of
blood pressure, better nutrition (weight gain, increased
appetite and albumin), and better control of anemia. In
the only moderate-sized randomized trial that has been
Modality Description Advantages Disadvantages
Palliative care Conservative 
management 
without dialysis
Good for those patients 
for whom dialysis is not 
expected to prolong life 
to a significant extent or 
in whom overwhelming 
comorbidities are 
present
Potentially reduced 
life expectancy
Modified from Tattersall JE, Daugirdas JT. Preparing for dialysis. In: Daugirdas JT, ed. Handbook 
of Chronic Kidney Disease Management. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer Health, Lippincott 
 Williams & Wilkins, 2011:511–523.
2.1
TABLE Treatment Options in Patients Who Need Renal  
Replacement Therapy (continued)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   24 09/10/14   1:01 am
25Chapter 2 / Management of CKD Stages 4 and 5
done, the FHN trial, where patients were randomized to 
get 6 treatments per week but in fact averaged only 5, those 
assigned to more frequent dialysis for 1 year were found to 
have reduction in left ventricular hypertrophy, improved 
physical functioning (those were the two primary outcomes 
of the FHN trial), a reduced severity of hypertension, and 
marginally improved control of serum phosphorus. There 
was no improvement in serum albumin, nutritional mea -
surements, or control of anemia (FHN Trial Group, 2010). 
The details of various “short daily” hemodialysis regimens 
are discussed in Chapter 16. Usually frequent hemodialysis 
is done at home and is only rarely offered in-center or in self-
care units. “Short daily” hemodialysis is gaining in popular-
ity, especially with the availability of easy-to-use machines 
dedicated to delivering such therapy in the home setting.
4. Long nocturnal hemodialysis. With “short daily” hemodialysis,
the number of hours spent per week on dialysis is usually
similar to, or only slightly greater than, the weekly time
spent on conventional 3 per week in-center dialysis. With
nocturnal dialysis, substantially longer weekly dialysis
times are the norm, because each session typically lasts
for 7–9 hours. When nocturnal dialysis is given in-center,
the usual frequency is 3 times per week, and the weekly di-
alysis time will be 24 hours per week compared to the usual 
12 hours per week with conventional schedules. When ap -
plied at home, nocturnal dialysis can be given 3 times per
week, every other night, or even 5 to 6 times per week, re-
sulting in markedly more hours per week of treatment than 
conventional therapy. Long nocturnal dialysis is discussed
in more detail in Chapter 16.
5. Peritoneal dialysis. Due to its simplicity, PD offers patients a
home-based therapy with very little requirement for special 
water systems and simple equipment setup time. The per -
centage of patients choosing PD over hemodialysis is about 
12% in the United States and 20%–30% in Canada. There
are two types of PD for a patient to consider: continuous
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), where a patient
performs manual exchanges 4 or 5 times per day, and auto-
mated peritoneal dialysis (APD), where a patient hooks up
to a machine at night and exchanges are carried out auto-
matically while the patient sleeps. The relative benefits of
each type of PD are discussed more fully in the PD chapters 
of this handbook.
Patients for whom PD is often favored include:
1. Infants or very young children
2. Patients with severe cardiovascular disease
3. Patients with difficult vascular access (e.g., diabetic
patients)
4. Patients who desire greater freedom to travel
5. Patients who wish to perform home dialysis but do not
have a suitable partner to assist them
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   25 09/10/14   1:01 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
26
Contraindications include an unsuitable peritoneum 
due to the presence of adhesions, fibrosis, or malignancy. 
Also, a substantial number of patients experience an in-
crease in their peritoneal membrane transport rate over 
time, resulting in inadequate ultrafiltration. Diabetic 
 patients tend to have a higher mortality when placed on PD 
versus hemodialysis, although in recent years this trend ap-
pears to have attenuated. A major cause of abandonment 
of PD is the occurrence of frequent episodes of peritonitis. 
Patient burnout is also a factor.
PD is less expensive than hemodialysis, particularly in 
developing countries. Also, it allows patients independence 
and freedom to travel and does not constrain patients to 
a fixed in-center hemodialysis schedule, although a more 
flexible schedule is also possible with home hemodialysis. 
PD may not be the best option for patients who do not have 
a “do-it-yourself ” mentality or who do not have the stability 
or social and family support at home to carry out a PD pro-
gram. Some patients simply prefer a hemodialysis sched -
ule of three or more well-defined periods per week during 
which they can get their dialysis “over with, ” leaving them 
free of any other dialysis responsibility. Some patients also 
enjoy the socialization that occurs in many hemodialysis 
units, and enjoy the regular personal interaction with staff 
and other patients.
There have been a number of improvements in PD 
over the past several years, including better disconnect 
systems, resulting in decreased peritonitis rates. Also, with 
use of APD, there can be improved clearances. New PD so-
lutions have become available, including glucose-based 
solutions with decreased amounts of glucose degradation 
products, as well as solutions using amino acids or icodex -
trin as the osmotic agent.
6. Postponing dialysis. In some patients, particularly the elderly, 
who do not have marked problems with fluid overload, the 
need for dialysis can be postponed by prescribing a very-
low-protein diet supplemented with ketoacids (Brunori,
2007). In carefully selected elderly patients assigned to this 
strategy, the need for dialysis was postponed on average by 
1 year.
7. The option not to dialyze: Palliative care.  There are no absolute
contraindications to dialysis therapy. In some states, le -
gal precedent exists guaranteeing dialysis to anyone who
desires it despite the severity of other medical problems.
When a patient is unable to voice his or her own thoughts
and when the family has divided opinions about the desir -
ability of initiation of life support by dialysis, the hospital
ethics committee may be of assistance.
The U.S. Renal Physicians Association has issued a 
clinical practice guideline for stopping or never beginning 
dialysis in certain patients (Renal Physicians Association, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   26 09/10/14   1:01 am
27Chapter 2 / Management of CKD Stages 4 and 5
2010), which consists of 10 recommendations for adult pa-
tients and 9 for pediatric patients. The guidelines emphasize 
shared decision making, informed consent or refusal, esti-
mating prognosis, and a time-limited trial of dialysis where 
indicated. The adult recommendations are summarized in 
Table 2.2. Patients with advanced disease in an organ sys-
tem other than the kidneys, or those with malignancy, have 
sometimes been excluded from chronic dialysis. For exam-
ple, those with advanced liver disease might have ascites, 
encephalopathy, bleeding diathesis, and hypotension. These 
concomitant problems may make access difficult, and the 
dialysis treatments may create too much hypotension or fail 
to correct the accompanying fluid overload. In some such 
patients, dialysis may be futile. Futility is an ethical principle 
on which one can make a reasonable decision not to initiate 
dialysis. On the other hand, some such patients may achieve 
good quality-of-life and “remission” of failure of other af-
fected organ systems with the fluid removal, electrolyte bal-
ance, and improved nutrition provided by multidisciplinary 
ESRD management.
C. Elderly patients and dialysis. In the United States and elsewhere, 
the fastest growing age group presenting for dialysis is the 
“oldest old” (patients older than 80 years). Access placement 
in this group is not particularly difficult, and cuffed venous 
Shared Decision Making in the Appropriate Initiation of and Withdrawal  
from Dialysis
1. Develop a physician–patient relationship for shared decision making
2. Fully inform acute kidney injury (AKI), stages 4 and 5 CKD, and ESKD patients 
about their diagnosis, prognosis, and all treatment options
3. Give all patients with AKI, stage 5 CKD, or ESKD an estimate of prognosis 
specific to their overall condition
4. Institute advance care planning
5. If appropriate, forgo (withhold initiating or withdraw ongoing) dialysis for 
patients with AKI, CKD, or ESKD in certain, well-defined situations
6. Consider forgoing dialysis for AKI, CKD, or ESKD patients who have a very poor 
prognosis or for whom dialysis cannot be provided safely
7. Consider a time-limited trial of dialysis for patients requiring dialysis, but who 
have an uncertain prognosis, or for whom a consensus cannot be reached 
about providing dialysis
8. Establish a systematic due process approach for conflict resolution if there is 
disagreement about what decision should be made with regard to dialysis
9. To improve patient-centered outcomes, offer palliative care services and 
interventions to all AKI, CKD, and ESKD patients who suffer from burdens of 
their disease
10.
 Use a systematic approach to communicate about diagnosis, prognosis, 
treatment options, and goals of care
Renal Physicians Association Clinical Practice Guidelines 
(for Adult Patients)2.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   27 09/10/14   1:01 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
28
catheters have been used with success in difficult cases. Time 
constraints are not a problem, and these individuals often ar -
rive eager for their treatments. Transportation often is available 
from assisted-living providers, retirement community staff, or 
municipal programs. A high rate of compliance with all aspects 
of treatment often offsets a higher prevalence of comorbid (car-
diac, vascular, malignancies) conditions in achieving a good 
outcome. As a result, many elderly patients placed on dialysis 
continue to enjoy a good quality-of-life and benefit from docu-
mented improvement in a variety of health outcome measures.
D. Adolescents on dialysis. T here may be significant problems af -
fecting adolescents on hemodialysis or PD. Issues include de-
pression and frustration with medical orders, interpersonal 
conflicts with family members, poor attendance at school due 
to frequent hospital admissions, and peer pressure because of 
inability to participate in school sports. This may manifest as 
a flat affect (limited social interactions and evasion of com-
munication) and nonadherence to medications, diet, and 
missed clinic visits. Psychological support and social worker 
input are key.
 II. DIAL YSIS ACCESS PLACEMENT ISSUES . F or hemodialysis, the pre-
ferred access is an arteriovenous (AV) fistula. It is important that 
for all patients for whom renal replacement therapy is antici -
pated, the veins in both arms should be preserved to the greatest 
extent possible. All venipunctures should be drawn from the back 
of the hand where possible. The use of PICC (percutaneous in-
travenous central catheter) lines should be avoided to the great -
est extent possible, as these often result in future access outflow 
problems. Because some patients have veins that are fragile, cre-
ating an access early is important; i.e., 6–9 months before antici-
pated initiation of dialysis. A lead time of at least 6 months prior 
to anticipated dialysis may allow correction of suboptimal flow or 
placement of a second fistula in the event that the initial fistula 
does not function properly. Vascular access issues are discussed 
in detail in several chapters of this handbook.
For PD, a peritoneal catheter should be in place at least 
2 weeks prior to the anticipated start of dialysis. In the past, an 
AV fistula was recommended as a fallback option for patients 
who choose PD. This is no longer recommended but is practiced 
in some centers. In situations where urgent start of dialysis is 
needed, a recent trend is to place a peritoneal catheter, which 
then allows initial control of uremia by PD, and buys time for sub-
sequent placement of an AV fistula.
 III. WHEN TO INITIATE DIALYSIS
A. Uremic syndrome. T he uremic syndrome consists of symptoms 
and signs that result from toxic effects of elevated levels of ni-
trogenous and other wastes in the blood.
1. Symptoms. U remic patients commonly become nauseated 
and often vomit soon after awakening. They may lose their 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   28 09/10/14   1:01 am
29Chapter 2 / Management of CKD Stages 4 and 5
appetite such that the mere thought of eating makes them 
feel ill. They often feel fatigued, weak, and/or cold. Their 
mental status is altered; at first, only subtle changes in per-
sonality may appear, but eventually, the patients become 
confused and, ultimately, comatose.
2. Signs. Signs of uremia in the modern age are less com-
mon, because patients now come to medical attention at
a relatively early stage of uremia. Nevertheless, sometimes
uremic patients presenting with a pericardial friction rub
or evidence of pericardial effusion with or without tam-
ponade may reflect uremic pericarditis, a condition that
urgently requires dialysis treatment. Foot- or wrist-drop
may be evidence of uremic motor neuropathy, a condition
that also responds to dialysis. Tremor, asterixis, multifocal
myoclonus, or seizures are signs of uremic encephalopa-
thy. Prolongation of the bleeding time occurs and can be a
problem in the patient requiring surgery.
3. Signs and symptoms: Uremia versus anemia. Several of the symp-
toms and signs previously ascribed exclusively to uremia
may be partially due to the associated anemia. When the
anemia of anemic CKD patients is improved with erythro -
poietin, they often experience a marked decrease in fatigue 
and a concomitant increase in sense of well-being and ex -
ercise tolerance. The bleeding time may also improve, and
there may be improvement in angina pectoris. There are
improvements in cognitive function as well.
4. Relationship between uremic syndrome and eGFR.  The uremic
syndrome commonly develops when the eGFR/1.73 m 2
falls below 8–10 mL/min. However, based on the results of
a randomized controlled trial, the so-called “IDEAL” study
(Cooper, 2010), a planned earlier start of dialysis (either
hemodialysis or PD) was associated with increased costs
but was not associated with improved quality-of-life or
survival. In the “IDEAL” trial, the average eGFR/1.73 m
2
estimated by the MDRD equation in the “early start” group
was 9.0 mL/min versus 7.2 mL/min in the “late start” group. 
There were frequent crossovers in the “late start” group, as
the intention was to wait for a lower eGFR to begin dialysis.
The results of this trial underscore that, when eGFR/1.73 m
2
is around 7 mL/min, symptoms attributable to uremia or
fluid overload are not uncommon and such patients are
typically deemed to need dialysis by their care providers.
B. Indications for dialysis in the chronic setting. Usually dialysis is ini-
tiated in adult patients when the eGFR/1.73 m 2 decreases to 
about 8 mL/min. However, evaluation of the need for dialysis 
should begin at a higher eGFR/1.73 m
2 level, probably around 
10–12 mL/min, and sometimes higher. Patients with heart 
failure and borderline eGFRs may have trouble with refractory 
fluid retention and may require earlier initiation of dialysis. 
Conditions that may argue for relatively early initiation of di -
alysis are listed in Table 2.3.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   29 09/10/14   1:01 am
Part I / Chronic Kidney Disease Management
30
It should be noted that pericarditis or pleuritis without 
other cause is an indication for urgent dialysis, particularly 
pericarditis, where the risk of rapidly developing pericardial 
effusion and cardiac tamponade is present. Neurologic dys-
function, especially signs of encephalopathy (manifested by 
asterixis) or uremic neuropathy, is also cause for prompt dialy-
sis, as is prolongation of the bleeding time, which could lead to 
gastrointestinal or other bleeding. Most of these urgent indica-
tions are found in patients who appear with acute on chronic 
renal failure. Additional issues pertaining to acute dialysis are 
discussed in Chapters 10 and 24.
References and Suggested Readings
Brunori G, et al. Efficacy and safety of a very-low-protein diet when postponing dialysis 
in the elderly: a prospective randomized multicenter controlled study. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2007;49:569–580.
Cooper BA, et al. IDEAL Study: a randomized, controlled trial of early versus late initia-
tion of dialysis. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:609–619.
Devine PA, Aisling EC. Renal replacement therapy should be tailored to the patient. 
Practitioner. 2014;258:19–22.
FHN Trial Group. In-center hemodialysis six times per week versus three times per 
week. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2287–2300.
Hussain J, Flemming K, Johnson M. “It’s a lot easier to say yes than no”—decision mak-
ing in end stage kidney disease. BMJ Support Palliat Care. 2014;4(suppl 1):A3.
Iyasere O, Brown EA. Determinants of quality of life in advanced kidney disease: time 
to screen? Postgrad Med J. 2014;90:340–347.
Kallab S, et al. Indications for and barriers to preemptive kidney transplantation: a 
review. Transplant Proc. 2010;42:782–784.
Kupin WR. Pre-emptive kidney transplantation. In: Daugirdas JT, ed. Handbook of 
Chronic Kidney Disease Management. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer Health, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011:511–523.
Lo WK, et al. Preparing patients for peritoneal dialysis. Perit Dial Int.  2008; 
28(suppl 3):S69–S71.
Intractable extracellular volume overload and/or hypertension
Hyperkalemia refractory to dietary restriction and pharmacologic treatment
Metabolic acidosis refractory to bicarbonate treatment
Hyperphosphatemia refractory to dietary counseling and to treatment with 
phosphorus binders
Anemia refractory to erythropoietin and iron treatment
Otherwise unexplained decline in functioning or well-being
Recent weight loss or deterioration of nutritional status, especially if accompanied 
by nausea, vomiting, or other evidence of gastroduodenitis
Urgent Indications
Neurologic dysfunction (e.g., neuropathy, encephalopathy, psychiatric 
disturbance)
Pleuritis or pericarditis without other explanation
Bleeding diathesis manifested by prolonged bleeding time
aModified from the National Kidney Foundation’s 2006 Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative 
(KDOQI) hemodialysis adequacy guidelines.
Complications That May Prompt Initiation of Kidney 
 Replacement Therapya
2.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   30 09/10/14   1:01 am
31Chapter 2 / Management of CKD Stages 4 and 5
Low J, et al. The experiences of close persons caring for people with chronic kidney 
disease stage 5 on conservative kidney management: contested discourses of age-
ing. Health (London). 2014.
Luckett T, et al. Advance care planning for adults with CKD: a systematic integrative 
review. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;63(5):761–770.
Mehrotra R, et al. Patient education and access of ESRD patients to renal replacement 
therapies beyond in-center hemodialysis. Kidney Int. 2005;68:378–390.
Renal Physicians Association. Shared Decision Making in the Appropriate Imita-
tion of and Withdrawal from Dialysis. 2nd ed. Rockville, MD: Renal Physicians 
 Association; 2010.
Shih YC, et al. Impact of initial dialysis modality and modality switches on Medicare 
expenditures of end-stage renal disease patients. Kidney Int. 2005;68:319–329.
Song MK, et al. Randomized controlled trial of SPIRIT: an effective approach to prepar-
ing African-American dialysis patients and families for end of life. Res Nurs Health. 
2009;32:260–273.
Traynor JP , et al. Early initiation of dialysis fails to prolong survival in patients with 
end-stage renal failure. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2002;13:2125–2132.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   31 09/10/14   1:01 am
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch002.indd   32 09/10/14   1:01 am
PART II
BLOOD-BASED 
THERAPIES
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch003.indd   33 11/10/14   3:02 pm