89
Dialysis Water 
and Dialysate
Richard A. Ward and Todd S. Ing5
 I. PRODUCT WATER FOR HEMODIALYSIS.  Patients are exposed to 
120−200 L of dialysis solution during each dialysis treatment. 
Any small molecular weight contaminants in the dialysis solu-
tion can enter the blood unimpeded and accumulate in the body 
in the absence of renal excretion. Therefore, the chemical and 
microbiologic purity of dialysis solution is important if patient 
injury is to be avoided. Dialysis solution is prepared from puri-
fied water (product water) and concentrates, the latter contain -
ing the electrolytes necessary to provide dialysis solution of the 
prescribed composition. Most concentrates are obtained from 
commercial sources and their purity is subject to regulatory over-
sight. The purity of the water used to prepare dialysis solution or 
to reconstitute concentrates from powder at a dialysis facility, is 
the responsibility of the dialysis facility.
A. Water contaminants harmful to dialysis patients.  Some substances 
added to municipal water supplies for public health reasons 
pose no threat to healthy individuals at the concentrations 
used, but can cause injury to renal failure patients if these sub-
stances are allowed to remain in the water used for dialysis. 
Therefore, all municipal water supplies should be assumed 
to contain substances harmful to dialysis patients, and all di -
alysis facilities require a system for purifying municipal water 
before it is used to prepare dialysis solution. What follows is 
a short list of the most common offending substances. Please 
refer to Suggested Readings for a more complete discussion of 
these and other contaminants.
1. Aluminum. This is added to water as a flocculating agent by 
many municipal water suppliers (aluminum sulfate is used 
to remove nonfilterable suspended particles). Aluminum
causes bone disease, a progressive and often fatal neuro-
logic deterioration known as the dialysis encephalopathy
syndrome, and anemia.
2. Chloramine. This is added to water to prevent bacterial pro-
liferation. Chloramine causes hemolytic anemia.
3. Fluoride. This is added to water supplies to reduce tooth
 decay. Large amounts of fluoride can elute into water from 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   89 09/10/14   1:05 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
90
an exhausted deionizer and cause severe pruritus, nausea, 
and fatal ventricular fibrillation.
4. Copper and zinc.  These can leach from metal pipes and fit -
tings and cause hemolytic anemia. Lead and aluminum can 
enter the water stream in a similar fashion.
5. Bacteria and endotoxin. The water used to prepare dialysis so-
lution and the final dialysis solution are both susceptible to 
microbiologic contamination by bacteria and their endo -
toxins. Endotoxins, endotoxin fragments, and other bacte-
rial products, such as short bacterial DNA fragments, some 
of which can be as small as 1,250 Da, can cross dialyzer
membranes and enter the bloodstream to produce pyro-
genic reactions and other untoward effects. The substances 
added to municipal water to suppress bacterial prolifera -
tion are removed by a dialysis facility’s water purification
system, increasing the importance of preventing bacterial
growth in the purified water.
6. Toxins from blue-green algae.  Contamination of municipal
 water supplies by other microbial products, such as micro-
cystins derived from blue-green algae, can also prove toxic
to hemodialysis patients (Carmichael, 2001). Dialysis cen-
ters should be aware of the potential presence of such tox -
ins, particularly in areas subject to seasonal algae blooms.
B. Water and dialysis solution quality requirements
1. Fluid quality standards.  The International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) has developed minimum standards
for the purity of the water used to prepare dialysis solution 
and the purity of the final dialysis solution. These standards 
have been adopted by the Association for the Advancement 
of Medical Instrumentation as national standards for the
United States and are also followed by regulatory organiza-
tions in many other countries. The standards set maximum 
levels for chemicals known to be toxic to hemodialysis pa -
tients, for chemicals known to be toxic to the general popu-
lation, and for bacteria and their endotoxins.
Current recommendations are that product water 
used to prepare dialysis solution should contain <100 
colony-forming units (CFU)/mL of bacteria and <0.25 
endotoxin units (EU)/mL of endotoxin. The maximum 
levels for the final dialysis solution are 100 CFU/mL and 
0.5 EU/mL, respectively. Pyrogenic reactions do not occur 
when levels of bacteria and endotoxins in the dialysis solu-
tion are maintained below these limits.
2. Ultrapure dialysis solution.  Low levels of endotoxins and en-
dotoxin fragments in dialysis solution, while not causing
pyrogenic reactions, may contribute to a chronic inflam-
matory response that may be associated with long-term
morbidity in dialysis patients. In observational studies,
the use of so-called “ultrapure” dialysis solution, which
is characterized by a bacteria level below 0.1 CFU/
mL and endotoxin level below 0.03 EU/mL, has been
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   90 09/10/14   1:05 am
Chapter 5 / Dialysis Water and Dialysate 91
linked to reduced plasma levels of C-reactive protein and 
 interleukin-6, an improved response of anemia to erythro-
poietin therapy, better nutrition as evidenced by increases 
in plasma albumin value, and higher estimated dry body 
weight, midarm muscle circumference, and urea nitrogen 
appearance rate. Ultrapure dialysis solution has also been 
associated with reduced plasma levels of β2-microglobulin 
and pentosidine (a surrogate marker of carbonyl stress), a 
slower loss of residual renal function, and lower cardiovas-
cular morbidity (Susantitaphong, 2013).
Although not all of the above benefits have been fully 
confirmed, many authorities believe that ultrapure dialysis 
solution should be used routinely. While use of ultrapure 
dialysis solution is highly desirable for hemodialysis, it is 
mandatory for online convective therapies such as online 
hemodiafiltration (see Chapter 17), which would other -
wise increase transfer of bacterial fragments from dialysis/ 
replacement solution to the blood.
C. Methods of purifying water for hemodialysis. S ystems used to purify 
water for dialysis consist of three parts: pretreatment, primary 
purification, and distribution to the point of use.
1. Pretreatment. T hese components usually include a valve 
to blend hot and cold water to a constant temperature, 
some form of preliminary filtration, softening, and filtra -
tion through activated carbon. This cascade is designed 
to prepare the water for optimal operation of the primary 
purification process. Correction of pH (using injection of 
hydrochloric acid) is sometimes needed to correct exces-
sive alkalinity, which can impede the ability of carbon beds 
to remove chlorine and chloramine and can cause fouling 
of reverse osmosis (RO) membranes by calcium and mag-
nesium salts.
a. W ater softener.  A wa ter softener is used to remove cal-
cium and magnesium from water by exchange for so-
dium bound ionically to a resin bed. The resin exchanges 
Na+ ions for Ca++ and Mg++ as well as for other cations 
such as iron and manganese. The water softener protects 
the downstream RO membrane from scaling by calcium 
and magnesium in the source water. Such mineral scale 
can foul an RO membrane quickly. Water softener resins 
need to be backwashed and regenerated frequently on a 
routine basis using a concentrated sodium chloride solu-
tion (brine). During backwash, water is drawn into the 
softener in a reverse direction to wash and fluff the resin, 
and then the brine solution is introduced to regenerate 
the resin, replacing the recently bound Ca ++ and Mg ++ 
ions with Na+ ions.
b. Carbon. A ctivated carbon is utilized to remove chlorine 
and chloramine, which are not removed by RO. Carbon 
also removes other small organic compounds that may 
be in the water. Chlorine can combine with organic 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   91 09/10/14   1:05 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
92
substances in the water to form potentially cancer-  
causing compounds. As a consequence, many municipal-
ities that previously used chlorine to suppress bacterial 
proliferation have changed over to using chloramine. 
The kinetics of the reaction through which carbon re-
moves chloramine from water are slower than those for 
the removal of chlorine so that systems that adequately 
removed chlorine might not adequately remove chlora -
mine. Chlorine or chloramine can permanently damage 
the downstream RO membrane. Importantly, chloramine 
can cause hemolytic anemia, and so this part of the wa-
ter purification process needs to be monitored extremely 
closely. In the past, some municipalities did not notify 
dialysis units of the change from chlorine to chloramine 
in the water supply, and outbreaks of hemolytic anemia 
have been reported in the course of such changeovers.
Because of the critical need to remove chloramine 
and related organics, the water stream is run through 
two carbon beds in series. The upstream “worker” car -
bon bed will become exhausted first. The downstream or 
“polisher” carbon bed is used as a backup. This strategy 
permits sequential replacement as the upstream carbon 
bed becomes exhausted. Any exhausted carbon bed tank 
needs to be replaced as soon as possible. Although the 
levels of chlorine and chloramine can be determined 
separately, it is simpler to measure total chlorine—the 
sum of chlorine and chloramine—and replace exhausted 
carbon beds based on that measurement. If the mu-
nicipal water contains chloramine, the total chlorine 
level in the water exiting the primary “worker” carbon 
bed needs to be checked before each dialysis shift. If 
breakthrough is noted, the total chlorine level should 
be checked downstream of the “polisher” bed. If no 
breakthrough is noted at that point, treatments can be 
continued while closely monitoring the outflow from 
the downstream “polisher” carbon bed. If total chlorine 
breakthrough is noted downstream of the “polisher” bed, 
treatments must cease immediately.
One critical aspect to proper functioning of granu-
lar activated carbon beds is the contact time of the water 
with the carbon. This “empty bed contact time” must be 
at least 10 min, to help ensure removal of chlorine and 
chloramine. Regular backwashing of the carbon beds with 
water fluffs the beds and prevents the formation of chan-
nels in the carbon, which reduce their efficiency. Optimal 
removal of chloramine by carbon may require adjustment 
of the pH of the feed water. Even with pH adjustment, 
carbon may provide inadequate removal of chloramine 
if the water contains corrosion inhibitors or other sub -
stances that prevent chloramine molecules from reach -
ing the surface of the carbon. In those situations it may 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   92 09/10/14   1:05 am
Chapter 5 / Dialysis Water and Dialysate 93
be necessary to use alternative methods of chloramine 
removal such as injection of sodium bisulfite.
2. Primary purification process.  T he primary purification pro -
cess is almost always RO. A filter is normally placed just up-
stream of the RO membrane to catch any carbon particles 
and resin beads that may have been inadvertently released 
from the pretreatment system.
a. Reverse osmosis. T his is achieved by high pressure filtra-
tion of water (using a powerful pump) through a semi-
permeable membrane that will hold back dissolved 
solutes. RO will remove more than 95% of ionic contami-
nants and nonionic contaminants as small as glucose. In 
addition, it provides an effective barrier against bacteria 
and endotoxins. In many cases, RO will provide water of 
sufficient quality for the preparation of dialysis solution 
without further purification.
b. Deionization. D eionization may be used as an alternative 
to RO, but is more frequently used to further purify water 
following processing by RO. Deionizers do not remove 
nonionic contaminants, bacteria, or endotoxins. A solid-
phase deionizer contains both cationic and anionic res -
ins. These can be configured as either two beds (one for 
the cationic resin and the other for the anionic resin) or 
as a single bed containing a mixture of both resins. Cat -
ionic resins contain sulfuric groups and these exchange 
hydrogen ions for other cations such as sodium, calcium, 
and aluminum. Anionic resins contain ammonium 
groups, which exchange hydroxyl ions for other anions 
such as chloride, phosphate, and fluoride. The hydrogen 
and hydroxyl ions released during the exchange process 
then combine to become water, resulting in a product 
water that contains very few residual ions.
Deionizer function is monitored by checking the 
conductivity of the outflow water; the fewer the ions 
that remain in the water, the lower the conductivity. 
When the resins in a deionizer tank have exchanged all 
their available hydrogen and hydroxyl ions for cations 
and anions from the water, its capacity to remove ions 
is “exhausted. ” The conductivity of the outflow water 
increases following exhaustion, signaling that the tank 
needs to be replaced. It is important to know that an 
“exhausted” deionizer resin is not inactive, but will rap-
idly release the ions that are most weakly bound to the 
resin if it continues to be used, with potentially serious 
adverse consequences for the patient. For example, fail -
ure to remove exhausted deionizer tanks led to patient 
deaths following the release of massive amounts of fluo-
ride into the dialysis water (Arnow, 1994). For this rea-
son, it is important to move exhausted deionizer tanks 
offline as soon as evidence of increased conductivity 
appears. All ion exchange tanks are required to be fitted 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   93 09/10/14   1:05 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
94
with online monitors that continuously monitor the con-
ductivity of the outflow water and divert that water away 
from the patients should it exceed 1 mS/cm (a resistivity 
of 1 MΩ-cm). Additionally, some tanks also have a light 
that is normally off, and then turns on when the outflow 
conductivity increases, or a light that is normally on, 
and which turns off when conductivity monitoring fails.  
If there is a light, it is very important to know which 
type it is.
The resin of deionizers presents a large surface 
area for bacterial proliferation. Since all bacteriostatic 
substances such as chlorine and chloramine will have 
been removed from the water by the time it reaches a 
deionizer, the level of bacterial contamination of the 
water flowing through deionizer tanks is subject to in-
crease. For this reason, an ultrafilter usually is placed 
downstream to the deionizer to remove any bacteria or 
endotoxin that may have accumulated from the deion-
izer tanks. Some centers also prefer to destroy bacteria 
(whether in a vegetative or a sporulated state) with ultra-
violet radiation. However, the UV process can increase 
the lipopolysaccharide and peptidoglycan content of the 
treated water due to bacterial death.
3. Distribution of purified water.  Purified water intended for the
preparation of dialysis solution must be distributed to the
individual dialysis machines to produce dialysis solution
that remains free of contaminants. Chemical contaminants 
are avoided by using inert materials, such as plastics, for
all components that contact the purified water and dialysis 
solution. Microbiologic contamination is avoided by using
appropriately designed and constructed piping systems
in combination with regular disinfection. The water dis-
tribution system is configured in a loop without multiple
branches or dead ends. If the distribution system includes
a storage tank (ideally, the use of a storage tank should be
avoided), the tank is of the minimum required size, has a
tight-fitting lid, and is designed for ease of disinfection.
Water storage and distribution systems are disin -
fected on a regular schedule to prevent bacterial coloniza -
tion of the system and minimize the formation of biofilm, 
which, once established, is very difficult to remove. When 
chemical germicides are used, disinfection is generally per-
formed at least monthly. The disinfection schedule should 
be designed to minimize biofilm formation in the storage 
and distribution system, not to eliminate biofilm after it 
has formed. Distribution systems are now available that 
can be disinfected with hot water or ozone. These systems 
allow more frequent disinfection because there is no need 
to rinse the system free of residual germicide. Water and di-
alysis solution cultures and endotoxin tests are performed 
to demonstrate the adequacy of the disinfection schedule.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   94 09/10/14   1:05 am
Chapter 5 / Dialysis Water and Dialysate 95
4. Bicarbonate concentrate mixing and distribution systems.  These
include containers used to distribute centrally prepared
concentrate to individual dialysis machines, which are dis-
infected frequently because bicarbonate concentrates are
particularly susceptible to bacterial contamination.
D. Safety standards and monitoring.  Careful procedures and docu-
mentation of the functioning of each part of the water supply 
system must be done. Both ISO and the European Best Prac-
tices Group have developed standards for equipment used to 
purify water for dialysis that are designed to maximize patient 
safety. These include chemical purity monitoring of water and 
dialysis solution. Chloramine levels are checked for at least 
daily. Absence of other chronic toxic components from the 
feed water must be verified on a regular basis. Both water and 
dialysis fluid must be checked using high-sensitivity methods 
for bacterial growth and presence of endotoxin. Finally, the 
patients themselves must be monitored, being always alert for 
evidence of unexplained clusters of hemolytic, pyrogenic, or 
other unusual reactions.
In the United States, the Forum of ESRD Networks Medi-
cal Advisory Council has prepared a Medical Director Toolkit 
to assist dialysis units in meeting the requirement of the “Con-
ditions for Coverage” (DeOreo, 2012). This document details 
not only monitoring of various parts of the water system but 
also the need to comply with required remote alarms, training, 
and planning in the event of emergencies.
II. DIALYSIS SOLUTION PREPARATION
A. Proportioning machines.  To reduce bulk and shipping costs,
dialysis fluid is manufactured in concentrated form and 
machines proportion it with water before delivering it to 
the dialyzer. The dialysis machine incorporates pumps and 
one-way valve systems that make the final dialysis solution 
by taking fixed volumes of dialysate concentrates and mix -
ing them with a fixed volume of heated purified water, or by 
using conductivity-based servocontrol systems to mix the 
concentrates and water. As discussed in the previous chapter, 
the ionic composition of the final dialysis solution is checked 
by conductivity, which is kept in a very tight range. As long 
as the solution remains in the target conductivity range, the 
dialysis solution is allowed to pass on to the dialyzer. If con-
ductivity gets outside the range, an alarm sounds and dialysis 
stops.
B. Dual-concentrate system for bicarbonate-based solutions.  Almost all 
dialysis solution used today is bicarbonate based, and this en-
genders a solubility issue. When making a bicarbonate solu-
tion of about 30 mM, the pH will be close to 8.0. At this pH, 
calcium and magnesium will precipitate out from solution, 
reducing their diffusible concentration and also contributing 
to scaling on dialysis machine lines and passages. To circum-
vent the problem of calcium and magnesium precipitation, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   95 09/10/14   1:05 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
96
a  b icarbonate-based dialysis solution–generating system 
 utilizes two concentrates: a “bicarbonate” concentrate and an 
“acid” concentrate. The “acid” concentrate contains a small 
amount of acetic or citric acid plus sodium, potassium (as 
needed), calcium, magnesium, chloride, and dextrose (op-
tional). The low pH of the acid concentrate keeps the calcium 
and magnesium in solution, even in concentrated form.
Specially designed double proportioning systems mix the 
two concentrates sequentially with purified water to make the 
final dialysis solution. During mixing, the small amount of ace-
tic acid in the “acid” concentrate (about 2–4 mM) reacts with 
an equimolar amount of bicarbonate in the “bicarbonate” con-
centrate to generate carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide gen-
erated forms carbonic acid, which lowers the pH of the final 
bicarbonate-containing solution to approximately 7.0–7.4. At 
this pH range, the calcium and magnesium in the product 
dialysis solution remain dissolved. The ratio of “acid” concen-
trate to “base” concentrate to water in the various proportion-
ing systems available depends on the machine manufacturer. 
Liquid “acid” concentrates are available between 35 times and 
45 times concentrated, and the corresponding liquid “bicar -
bonate” concentrates are also concentrated differently. In units 
using more than one brand of dialysis machine, it is important 
to use concentrate designed for the proportioning ratio of a 
given machine.
The bicarbonate level shown on the monitor of many 
dialysis machines that allow for adjusting dialysis solution 
 bicarbonate by altering the concentrate proportioning ratio 
is the final bicarbonate concentration and does not take into 
account the acetate of sodium acetate that was produced 
from reaction of acetic acid with an equimolar amount of so-
dium  bicarbonate. This acetate will generate bicarbonate as 
it is metabolized in the body on an equimolar basis. Thus, the 
actual base content of the dialysate used will be higher than 
that shown on the monitor (Kohn, 2012). With most liquid acid 
concentrates containing acetic acid, the amount of acetic acid, 
and hence that of acetate present in the product dialysate after 
mixing commonly is about 4 mM.
C. Dry concentrates
1. Bicarbonate. I n some machines, a cartridge containing dry 
sodium bicarbonate is used in place of a liquid  “bicarbonate” 
concentrate. Use of dry bicarbonate cartridges obviates the 
problem of bacterial growth in “bicarbonate” concentrate 
and the concern of subsequent contamination of the final 
dialysis solutions.
2. Acid (citric acid or sodium diacetate). W hile acetic acid is a liq-
uid, dry “acid” concentrates can be made using either citric 
acid or sodium diacetate. The low concentration of citrate 
generated in citric acid–based dialysis solution may che-
late plasma calcium that is adjacent to the dialysis mem-
brane, impeding coagulation, improving dialyzer clearance 
slightly, and increasing the dialyzer reuse number. In dry 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   96 09/10/14   1:05 am
Chapter 5 / Dialysis Water and Dialysate 97
acid concentrates containing citric acid (0.8 mM) plus 
a small amount (0.3 mM) of acetic acid, after mixing, the di-
alysis solution will contain 0.8 mM citrate (2.4 mEq/L) and 
0.3 mM acetate, yielding about 2.7 mEq/L of 
 bicarbonate- 
generating base. 
Sodium diacetate is a compound containing acetic 
acid and sodium acetate. Acid concentrates formulated 
with sodium diacetate typically contain twice the concen-
tration of acetate in the final dialysate compared to those 
using acetic acid. It is important to take this relatively high 
concentration of acetate (up to 8 mM) into account as an 
additional source of bicarbonate-generation (Kohn, 2012).
D. Final dialysis solution composition. The composition range of typi-
cally used dialysis solutions is given in Table 5.1. The concen-
trations of sodium, potassium, and calcium can be varied by 
choosing different “acid” concentrates or by adding salts of 
these cations to the appropriate “acid” concentrates prior to 
use. In addition, some dialysis machines allow the concentra-
tion of sodium in the dialysis solution to be varied during the 
course of an individual treatment—a practice known as so-
dium profiling. Sodium profiling may help reduce the tendency 
to intradialytic hypotension and the postdialysis washed-out 
feeling in some patients, but whenever the average dialysis 
solution sodium level is increased, this may predispose to in-
creased thirst, excessive fluid intake, and hypertension (see 
Chapter 12). Most dialysis machines allow the bicarbonate 
level to be varied without changing to a different concentrate 
by altering the proportioning pump ratio. This allows use of 
dialysis solution bicarbonate levels from 20 to 40 mM, and 
such a feature is particularly useful when more frequent di-
alysis is employed, when dialyzing nonuremic patients (e.g., to 
treat poisoning) or to treat alkalemic patients. Minor changes 
Composition of a Standard Hemodialysis Solution
5.1
TABLE
Component Concentration (mM)
Sodium 135–145
Potassium 2–3
Calcium 1.25–1.75
(2.5–3.5 mEq/L)
Magnesium 0.25–0.375
(0.5–0.75 mEq/L)
Chloride 98–124
Acetate
a 3–8
Citratea 0.8–1.0 (2.4–3.0 mEq/L)
Bicarbonate 25–35
Glucose 0–11
pCO2 40–110 (mm Hg)
pH 7.1–7.3 (units)
a The acetate or citrate is added in the form of acetic acid, sodium diacetate, or citric acid to the 
“acid concentrate.” When mixed with the “bicarbonate concentrate,” the hydrogen ion from either 
of these acids reacts with bicarbonate to form CO2 (i.e., carbonic acid) to establish a buffer system.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   97 09/10/14   1:05 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
98
in calcium, magnesium, and potassium (if present) will take 
place whenever dialysate bicarbonate level is altered.
E. Disinfection of dialysis machines. Dialysis machines are disinfected 
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The water 
inlet lines to the dialysis machines are disinfected at the same 
time as the water distribution system. Dialysis machines are 
now available that incorporate a bacteria- and endotoxin-
retentive ultrafilter located in the dialysis machine itself. This 
filter intercepts the dialysis solution flow immediately before 
it is passed to the dialyzer. These dialysate ultrafilters, which 
are rated for a certain number of treatments or months of 
operation, are disinfected when the dialysis machine is dis-
infected. Such ultrafilters facilitate the routine preparation of 
“ultrapure dialysis solutions. ”
References and Suggested Readings
Arnow PM, et al. An outbreak of fatal fluoride intoxication in a long-term hemodialysis 
unit. Ann Intern Med. 1994;121:339–344.
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Quality of Dialysis Fluid 
for Hemodialysis and Related Therapies, ANSI/AAMI/ISO 11663:2009.  Arlington, VA: 
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation; 2009.
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Water for Hemodialysis 
and Related Therapies, ANSI/AAMI/ISO 13959:2009. Arlington, VA: Association for 
the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation; 2009.
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Water Treatment Equip-
ment for Hemodialysis and Related Therapies, ANSI/AAMI/ISO 26722:2009. Arling -
ton, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation; 2009.
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Guidance for the Prepa-
ration and Quality Management of Fluids for Hemodialysis and Related Therapies, 
ANSI/AAMI/ISO 23500:2011 . Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of 
Medical Instrumentation; 2011.
Canaud B, et al. Microbiologic purity of dialysate: rationale and technical aspects. 
Blood Purif. 2000;18:200–213.
Carmichael WW , et al. Human fatalities from cyanobacteria; chemical and biological 
evidence for cyanotoxins. Environ Health Perspect 2001;109:663–668.
Damasiewicz MJ, Polkinghorne KR, Kerr PG. Water quality in conventional and home 
haemodialysis. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2012;8:725–734.
DeOreo P , et al. Medical Director Toolkit. Developed by the Forum of ESRD Networks’ 
Medical Advisory Council (MAC). 2012. http://esrdnetworks.org/mac-toolkits/
download/medical-director-toolkit-2/medical-director-toolkit/at_download/
file. Accessed July 27, 2014.
European Renal Association—European Dialysis and Transplantation Association. 
 European best practice guidelines for haemodialysis, section IV—dialysis fluid 
purity. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2002;17(suppl 7):45–62.
Kohn OF, Kjellstrand CM, Ing TS. Dual-concentrate bicarbonate-based hemodialysis: 
Know your buffers. Artif Organs. 2012;36:765–768.
Ledebo I. Ultrapure dialysis fluid—direct and indirect benefits in dialysis therapy. Blood 
Purif. 2004;22(suppl 2):20–25.
Sam R, et al. Composition and clinical use of hemodialysates. Hemodial Int. 2006;10:15–28.
Schindler R, et al. Short bacterial DNA fragments: detection in dialysate and induction 
of cytokines. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004;15:3207–3214.
Susantitaphong P , Riella C, Jaber BL. Effect of ultrapure dialysate on markers of 
 inflammation, oxidative stress, nutrition and anemia parameters: a meta-analysis. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28:438–446.
Ward DM. Chloramine removal from water used in hemodialysis. Adv Ren Replac Ther. 
1996;3:337–347.
Ward RA. Ultrapure dialysate. Semin Dial. 2004;17:489–497.
Ward RA. Dialysis water as a determinant of the adequacy of dialysis. Semin Nephrol. 
2005;25:102–110.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch005.indd   98 09/10/14   1:05 am