99
 I. INTRODUCTION: TYPES OF VASCULAR ACCESS. A rteriovenous (AV) fis-
tulas and grafts are the commonest forms of vascular access used 
for maintenance hemodialysis. An AV fistula involves creating an 
anastomosis between an artery and a native vein, allowing the 
blood to flow directly from the artery to the vein. Traditionally, 
the anastomosis is made at the wrist between the radial artery 
and the cephalic vein, although there are many variations pos-
sible, with anastomoses in the snuffbox, in the forearm area, or 
at the elbow or upper arm. An AV graft is similar, except that the 
distance between the feeding artery and vein is bridged by a tube 
made of prosthetic material. The most commonly used bridging 
material is polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) polymer. A third type 
of access, the cuffed venous catheter, is discussed in the following 
chapter.
An AV fistula cannot be used immediately as the fistula 
maturation process generally takes about 6–8 weeks. During the 
maturation process blood flow through the newly created fistula 
will gradually increase due to dilatation of both artery and vein. 
Pressure and flow–induced remodeling (thickening) of the wall 
of the fistula vein, which is the section where the needles will be 
inserted, strengthens the fistula and limits tearing and extrava-
sation, while dilatation of the vein facilitates future needle in-
sertion. An AV graft can be used earlier than a fistula, generally 
within 1–3 weeks after placement.
A well-functioning fistula remains the preferred access 
compared to a graft due to a fistula’s lower incidence of infec-
tion, higher patency rates, and overall better patient survival. 
However, AV fistulas have their problems as well, one important 
downside being a poor maturation rate in those with unsuitable 
blood vessels, including many elderly patients. An AV graft can be 
a suitable initial choice of access in patients with insufficiently 
large or poorly distensible blood vessels. With prolonged use, 
some dilatation of the vein downstream to an AV graft typically 
occurs, and sometimes this newly enlarged vein segment can 
then be connected directly to an artery, converting the graft to 
a fistula.
Arteriovenous Fistulas 
and Grafts: The Basics
Tushar J. Vachharajani, Steven Wu, 
Deborah Brouwer-Maier, and Arif Asif
6
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   99 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
100
A. Neointimal hyperplasia. Mechanistically, an AV graft is a less de-
sirable vascular access option than an AV fistula because with 
a graft there is a higher risk of neointimal hyperplasia. Most 
commonly, this occurs in the venous segment downstream 
from the graft–vein anastomosis. Hyperplasia obstructs the 
lumen of the downstream vein, leading to poor flow in the 
graft and prolonged bleeding after removal of dialysis needles 
(due to increased intragraft pressure). Eventually, this leads to 
graft thrombosis. The cause of accelerated neointimal hyper -
plasia in AV grafts is thought to be turbulence downstream 
to the graft–vein anastomosis, and also to a compliance mis-
match between the relatively rigid graft and the more flexible 
vein. Periodic exposure of this vulnerable vein segment to acti-
vated blood exiting the dialyzer may accelerate the process, al-
though stenosis can develop downstream to an AV graft even 
when the graft is left unused.
Although an AV graft is an inferior access option com -
pared to a mature AV fistula, it is superior to a central venous 
catheter. Patients with either AV fistula or AV graft have less se-
rious infections, lower morbidity, and higher survival rates than 
patients managed with venous catheters. Recently, some of the 
poorer results with central venous catheters have been shown 
to be due to selection bias (venous catheters tend to be used in 
sicker patients), and the infection risk with venous catheters, 
especially in elderly patients, has been found to be relatively 
low (Murea, 2014). Thus, in certain clinical circumstances dis-
cussed more thoroughly in the next chapter, the chronic 
 venous 
catheter remains a useful form of vascular access.
II. GUIDELINES TARGETING INCREASED USE OF AV FISTULA. Guidelines de-
veloped by the National Kidney Foundation’s Kidney Disease Out-
comes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) and the “Fistula First” initiative 
(see web references) promote construction of AV fistulas, target-
ing at least 68% use in prevalent patients on dialysis. Early referral 
of CKD patients to nephrologists prior to the start of hemodialy-
sis allows more time for construction of an AV access. This avoids 
the risks of a central vein catheter that is usually required when
the patient is referred for dialysis late in the course of chronic
kidney disease. Recently “urgent start peritoneal dialysis” has
been advocated as an initial treatment method for patients who
urgently need dialysis. This allows such patients to be stabilized
without subjecting them to a chronic venous catheter. One key
factor to increasing AV fistula use is the presence of a dedicated
and trained access surgeon functioning as part of a vascular ac-
cess team.
Over the past decade, since the implementation of the US 
Government sponsored fistula first breakthrough initiative, the 
AV fistula rate in the US prevalent hemodialysis patients has in-
creased from 26% to 61%. Many US Centers and European centers 
achieve much higher percentages ( ≥90 %). In the United States, 
however, the central venous catheter use rate has not declined as 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   100 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 101
much as planned, leading to a revision of the initiative goal from 
“fistula first” to “fistula first and catheter last. ”
III. VESSEL PRESERVATION. In patients with progressive CKD who are
expected to require dialysis, superficial and deep veins of both
arms must be protected, anticipating their possible use for vas-
cular access. Accordingly, one should minimize venipunctures
and placement of peripheral infusion lines in the upper extrem -
ity, especially in the cephalic and antecubital veins of either arm. 
The veins on the dorsum of the hand should be used whenever
possible. Because of the risk of subsequent central vein stenosis,
the subclavian vein should not be cannulated unless absolutely
necessary and use of percutaneously inserted central catheter
(PICC) lines and midline catheters should be rejected, also. The
radial and brachial arteries need to be preserved for future AV
access creation, and so cardiac and other endovascular percu -
taneous interventions should not be done through these arter -
ies. Placement of endovascular leads for a cardiac implantable
electronic device (CIED) should be avoided as well, as this can
adversely affect patency of the central veins; plus, the long-term
risk of infection will be high. Instead, CKD patients who require a 
pacemaker or similar device should be evaluated for approaches
utilizing epicardial as well as subcutaneous lead placement.
A. The American Nephrology Nurses Association “Save the Vein” project.  
This organization has a website (See Web References) that of-
fers patient-targeted brochures in English or Spanish describ-
ing the importance of preserving arm veins. The website also 
has links to a supplier for patient wristbands bearing the in -
scription: “Save Veins • No IV / LAB Draws. ”
I V. ARTERIOVENOUS ACCESS PLANNING
A. Patient education and timing issues.  Patients with a glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) of <30 mL/min per 1.73 m2 should be ed-
ucated about all renal replacement modality options includ -
ing peritoneal dialysis and renal transplantation. For those 
choosing hemodialysis, an AV fistula should be placed at least 
6 months prior to the planned initiation of dialysis. In patients 
planning to start peritoneal dialysis, creation of an AV fistula is 
optional. A backup AV fistula is sometimes created in a perito-
neal dialysis patient to avoid the risks associated with central 
vein catheters when peritoneal dialysis must be stopped for a 
time; for example, to replace the catheter because of malfunc-
tion or severe peritonitis. However, peritonitis rates are much 
lower now than in the past, so most centers no longer create 
such backup fistulas. Patients who are planning to receive a 
live donor kidney in the near future but who need dialysis for a 
short time can be managed without a permanent AV access. In 
such patients, short-term use (<6 months) of a cuffed venous 
catheter for access may be appropriate unless the patient has 
a contraindication to venous catheter use (such as valvular 
heart disease, which might predispose to endocarditis).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   101 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
102
B. Predicting the need for dialysis. A nticipating the need for dialysis 
correctly is not always a simple task. Premature creation of an 
AV access is an unnecessary utilization of resources, and many 
elderly patients, especially, have been shown to die before need-
ing dialysis. One tool that may help in predicting the need for re-
nal replacement therapy was developed by Tangri (2011, 2013), 
though their equations predict the risk of developing ESRD over 
a time window of 3 years. A similar predictive equation based 
on male US Veterans Affairs patients was developed by Drawz 
(2013), which predicts the risk of ESRD over a 1-year period.
 V. PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
A. Patient history. A t horough history is required, querying about 
previous episodes of central vein catheters or intravenous 
pacemaker/CIED implantation, prior use of PICC lines, and 
prior vascular surgery. Comorbid conditions such as conges -
tive heart failure, diabetes mellitus, or peripheral vascular dis-
ease may limit options for access construction. Patients with 
severe heart failure may not tolerate the additional cardiac 
output required to circulate blood through the access. Patients 
with severe vascular disease due to atherosclerosis or diabetes 
or patients with extensive damage to their arm veins due to 
prior needle sticks or failed AV fistula may not have adequate 
blood vessels to support creation of an AV access, although 
even in such patients an AV fistula often can be created in the 
upper extremity using innovative surgical techniques.
B. Physical examination: T he presence of all pulses in upper extrem-
ity (axillary, brachial, radial, and ulnar) should be evaluated 
and recorded. The blood pressure in both arms should be mea-
sured, and the difference between the arms should be graded as 
normal if <10 mm Hg, borderline if 10–20 mm Hg, or problem-
atic if > 20 mm Hg. The Allen test, which measures collateral 
flow between the radial and ulnar arteries at the palmar arch, 
can be either done by physical exam or aided by Doppler (see 
what follows). The sensitivity of the Allen test can be increased 
if combined with pulse oximetry (Paul and Feeny, 2003). Details 
of how to perform the Allen test are given in  Table 6.1. The pa-
tient should be examined for evidence of previous central or 
venous catheterization and for signs of trauma or surgery of 
the arm, chest, or neck, including previous AV access surgery. 
The presence of arm edema, collateral veins, or differential ex-
tremity size should prompt an evaluation of the central veins.
C. Imaging studies.  R outine preoperative mapping of the arm to 
evaluate veins and arteries helps with selection of the most 
appropriate vein and the best location to create an access. Use 
of imaging studies has been shown to increase the rate of well-
functioning fistula placements.
1. Doppler ultrasonography. D oppler ultrasonography, which can 
measure flow velocity as well as the inner diameter of the 
brachial and radial arteries and peripheral veins, should 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   102 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 103
be performed in all patients to identify suitable arteries 
and veins for access placement. The poor visualization of 
central veins on Doppler ultrasonography is a limitation of 
this method. Doppler ultrasonography is best performed in 
the operating room after regional anesthesia of the arm by 
nerve block, as the veins tend to dilate postanesthesia ad-
ministration; under normal circumstances, these veins can 
be constricted and may not be visualized properly.
a. Minimal vein and artery size.  Controversy exists about
the minimum size of the feeding artery and target vein 
for a successful fistula. Studies suggest Studies sug-
gest that the minimum vein lumen diameter should be  
about 2.5 mm for successful surgical anastomosis 
(Okada and Shenoy, 2014) and minimal arterial diameter  
should be 2.0 mm. Smaller, “borderline” vessels down 
to 1.5 mm ( for both artery and vein) have been used 
to create successful fistulas, but this may require an 
experienced surgeon with skills to operate on such 
small vessels (Pirozzi, 2010). More important may be 
the ability of the artery and vein to dilate after anasto-
mosis, to allow an increase in flow.
b. Vein dilation test.  During the Doppler study the proximal
vein is occluded using a tourniquet and the increase in 
size is recorded. An average increase in internal diam-
eter of 50% has been associated with successful fistula 
outcome (Malovrh, 2002).
c. Arterial dilation test. During the Doppler study the pulse con-
tour of the artery is examined. The pulse contour of the ar-
tery is normally triphasic, due to high peripheral resistance. 
The patient is asked to clench the fist for 2 minutes, and then 
Allen Test (Test of Palmar Arch Patency)
6.1
TABLE
1. Position the patient so that they are facing you with their arm extended with 
the palm turned upward
2. Compress both the radial and ulnar arteries at the wrist
3. With the arteries compressed firmly, instruct the patient to create a fist 
repetitively in order to cause the palm to blanch
4.
 When the patient’s hand is blanched, release the compression of the ulnar 
artery and watch the palm to determine if it becomes pink. Then release all 
compression
5.
 Repeat steps 2–4 for the radial artery
Interpretation: When color returns to the blanched palm upon release of the 
arterial compression it indicates arterial patency and reflects upon adequacy of 
flow. Blanching that persists for ≥5 s after release of the ulnar artery is a positive 
test for ulnar artery insufficiency. Likewise, blanching that persists for ≥5 s 
following release of the radial artery is positive for radial artery insufficiency
Modified (corrected) from Beathard GD. A practicioner’s resource guide to physical examination of 
the vascular access. ESRD Network of Texas. http://www.esrdnet15.org/QI/C5D.pdf.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   103 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
104
to open the hand; the resulting hyperemic response normally 
converts the triphasic arterial pulse contour to a biphasic 
pattern in patients capable of a healthy arterial dilation.
d. Mapping. The cephalic and ulnar venous systems should
also be evaluated for continuity and absence of stric-
tures. Some surgeons perform venous mapping with a
proximal tourniquet in place to distend and better iden-
tify veins suitable for AV fistula construction.
2. Venography. Venography should be reserved for evaluating
the central veins, especially in patients with a history of
transvenous placement of a pacemaker, physical findings of 
upper extremity edema, collateral veins around the shoul-
der or on the chest wall, and/or unequal extremity size. If 
venography is performed, 30 mL or less of nonionic, low os-
molality contrast, diluted 1:4, should be used to avoid neph-
rotoxicity. Full-strength contrast is usually not required for 
venography. Venography alone does not help evaluate the
arterial tree.
3. Arteriography. Arteriography is indicated when pulses in the 
desired access location are markedly diminished or absent
or there is a >20 mm Hg difference in mean arterial pres-
sure between the two arms.
VI. POSSIBLE LOCATIONS FOR UPPER EXTREMITY AV FISTULAS.  For an
overview, see Okada and Shenoy (2014) (Table 6.2).
A. Arm fistula locations.  An AV fistula can be categorized as con-
ventional or transposed, depending on its connection to the 
arterial and venous circulations. A conventional AV fistula is 
created by connecting a superficial artery and vein and gener-
ally does not require extensive mobilization of the vessels. A 
transposed AV fistula utilizes deeper veins and requires ex -
tensive mobilization of the vein into a subcutaneous tunnel 
for easy needle access. Compared to conventional AV fistulas, 
transposed AV fistulas are technically more challenging to cre-
ate and require greater healing time. Generally, conventional 
AV fistulas are created as a single-stage surgical procedure, 
whereas creation of a transposed AV fistula can be either a 
one-stage or two-stage procedure.
At least nine potential sites for AV fistula can be used in 
the upper extremity (Table 6.2). The anatomical snuffbox  
fistula is the distal variant of the radiocephalic fistula created 
between the tendons of extensor policis longus and brevis . The 
classic wrist radiocephalic or Brescia–Cimino fistula (Fig. 6.1) 
placed in the nondominant arm is the preferred access. Other 
forearm AV fistulas, such as the ulnar artery–basilic vein  
fistula, should be considered when a radiocephalic fistula is 
not an option. Before considering an upper arm site, several 
other transposed forearm sites should be evaluated; for exam-
ple, the forearm cephalic vein to proximal radial artery or 
brachial artery, and the transposed forearm basilic vein to 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   104 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 105
radial  ar tery or brachial artery. If creating a forearm fistula 
is not possible, which happens not uncommonly in diabetic 
or elderly patients with atherosclerosis, then an upper arm 
 brachial  artery–cephalic vein fistula (Fig. 6.2), or a trans -
posed basilic vein–brachial artery fistula (Fig. 6.3) are poten-
tial options. Less commonly used options are the Gracz fistula 
(which uses a perforating vein that arterializes both upper arm 
cephalic and basilic veins) and the brachial bidirectional ce-
phalic fistula (which arterializes both forearm and upper arm 
Sites for AV Fistula Creation in the Upper Extremity
6.2
TABLE
Conventional
Snuffbox (distal-most site)
Radiocephalic or Brescia–Cimino (radial artery to forearm cephalic vein at the 
wrist)
Ulnar artery to forearm basilic vein (uncommon)
Brachial artery to upper arm cephalic vein (at the elbow)
Transposed
Forearm basilic vein to radial artery at the wrist
Forearm basilic vein to the brachial artery (loop configuration)
Forearm cephalic vein to the brachial artery (loop configuration)
Transposed basilic vein in the upper arm to the brachial artery
Perforating veins in the proximal forearm to proximal radial artery (Konner 
modification of the Gracz fistula)
FIGURE 6.1 Radiocephalic AV fistula. (Reprinted with permission from Atlas of Dialysis 
Vascular Access—http://www.fistulafirst.org.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   105 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
106
FIGURE 6.3 Transposed basilic vein to brachial artery AV fistula. (Reprinted with permis-
sion from Atlas of Dialysis Vascular Access—http://www.fistulafirst.org.)
cephalic veins). When a perforating vein fistula is used, it has 
been suggested that the original surgical procedure be modi-
fied  (Konner, 1999). When all sites in the nondominant arm 
have been exhausted, then the dominant arm can be used.
FIGURE 6.2 Brachiocephalic AV fistula. (Reprinted with permission from Atlas of Dialysis 
Vascular Access—http://www.fistulafirst.org.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   106 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 107
1. Initial selection of elbow perforating vein fistula for 
patients who are elderly or with comorbidities. In such 
patients, a calcified radial artery with a small lumen and 
thickened wall is a common finding, and fistulas fed by 
such arteries are likely to fail. In one small study (Palmes, 
2011), a forearm fistula was performed only if the diameter 
of the radial and ulnar artery were >2.0 mm at the wrist 
and no calcification or segmental stenosis was detected. 
Also, with tourniquet in place at the wrist the cephalic vein 
diameter had to be at least 2.5 mm. If not, and if a perforat-
ing vein was present at the elbow, and the brachial artery 
and cephalic vein were of suitable diameter, a perforating 
vein AV fistula was created at the elbow, using the Konner 
modification (discussed earlier) of the Gracz approach. In 
the group of elderly patients with poor blood vessels get -
ting the perforating vein elbow fistula, fistula patency rate 
at 24 months was an impressive 78%.
B. Fistulas in the leg. A V fistulas in the lower extremity are created 
rarely, because of a higher complication rate and poorer out -
come, but they remain an option once all potential sites in the 
upper extremity have been exhausted. The possible sites in-
clude fistulas connecting the superficial femoral artery to the 
femoral vein or the saphenous vein to the popliteal artery.
C. Steal due to fistula on the same side as an internal mammary artery– 
coronary artery bypass graft. T his has now been widely reported, 
and in such patients, a contralateral AV fistula should be in -
serted to avoid this problem (Coskun, 2013).
 VII. OPERA TIVE PROCEDURE FOR AN AV FISTULA . A V fistula surgery is usu-
ally performed in the operating room under regional anesthesia. 
The anastomosis can be either side of artery to side of vein or side 
of artery to end of vein. In both instances, distal blood flow through 
the artery is preserved. With the side-to- side method, higher pres-
sures may sometimes be transmitted to the distal veins in the 
hand, causing swelling and the so-called “red hand syndrome. ” 
The side-of-artery to end-of-vein anastomosis prevents venous 
hypertension in the hand because the distal vein is ligated off. A 
modified “piggyback SLOT technique has been shown to substan-
tially reduce torsion in the anastomosed vein and to reduce juxta-
anastomotic stenosis (Bharat, 2012). The details of the operative 
techniques are beyond the scope of this book. It is important to 
emphasize that AV fistula placement is not something that can be 
relegated to a junior or inexperienced vascular surgeon, but is best 
done by a surgeon with both experience and interest in performing 
these sometimes complex and demanding procedures.
A. Measuring radial artery fistula blood flow at time of surgery. T he radial 
artery normally has a flow rate of 20–30 mL/min, and this flow 
increases to 200–300 mL/min immediately after creation of the 
anastomosis (Konner, 1999). In one study of forearm fistulas, 
the flow in the anastomosed vein was measured immediately 
after surgery, and an immediate flow rate < 120 mL/min was 
highly predictive of subsequent fistula failure (Saucy, 2010).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   107 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
108
B. Predicting matured fistula blood flow using a computational algorithm.  
A consortium of investigators have developed an algorithm to 
predict ultimate fistula flow rate for various types of fistula, 
based on baseline patient demographic variables, and preop-
erative Doppler measurements of vessel diameters and flows 
(Caroli, 2013). This algorithm is not yet widely used clinically.
 VIII. PERIOPERATIVE CARE AND FISTULA MATURATION.  Some centers pre -
pare the patient for AV fistula surgery by having the patient
perform arm exercises for several weeks prior to surgery, with
the idea that this might help the vein to dilate and achieve a
luminal size of more than 2.5 mm. Following surgery, the arm
should initially be kept elevated. Tight circumferential dressings 
should be avoided. Hand exercises (e.g., squeezing a rubber ball
or a soft handgrip device) may help increase fistula blood flow
and pressure, and are believed by some to assist with the matu-
ration of an AV fistula; a concept that has never been confirmed 
in a randomized trial. The fistula should never be used for ve-
nipuncture. Fistula blood flow should be checked daily (more
frequently initially) by feeling for a thrill at the anastomotic site
and by listening for an associated bruit. A physician, nurse, di-
alysis technician, or even a well-informed patient should be able 
to perform a physical examination of an AV fistula. The basics of 
physical examination of an AV access are described later in this
chapter.
A. Rule of sixes.  All new AV fistulas should be examined within
4–6 weeks of creation for signs of maturation. At the time of 
intended use, the vein diameter should be at least 6 mm. A 
mature AV fistula should follow the “rule of 6”—it should be 
6 mm in diameter, less than 6 mm below the skin, have a blood 
flow of at least 600 mL/min, and include a straight segment for 
cannulation that is at least 6 cm in length. Generally, matura -
tion should occur by around 6 weeks after surgery.
B. Details of fistula maturation. An experienced and well-trained ex-
aminer can clinically differentiate between a mature and an 
immature AV fistula. The fistula must be allowed to mature, 
as premature attempts to cannulate it can be associated with 
infiltration, compression of the vessel, and permanent loss of 
the fistula. Primary maturation failure of an AV fistula can re-
sult from an atherosclerotic artery, inadequate anastomosis, 
or an inability of the artery and/or vein to dilate due to vessel 
damage, for example, due to preexisting vascular calcification 
or sclerosis. One remediable cause is the presence of multiple 
tributary branches in the vein draining the AV fistula. These 
branches can siphon off the increased venous flow, lessening 
the flow-induced increase in fistula pressure that induces mat-
uration of the main venous channel. Often ligation of such side 
branches can bring about or hasten the maturation process. 
If a fistula cannot be cannulated or support dialysis therapy 
≥6 weeks after placement, an imaging fistulogram should be 
obtained to determine the source of the problem.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   108 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 109
IX. INITIAL TRIAL CANNULATION OF A NEW AV FISTULA. If physical assess-
ment has shown that the fistula has adequately matured, the next 
step is to perform a trial cannulation.
A. Day of the week. If possible, the initial trial cannulation should
be done on a nondialysis day. This eliminates potential com -
plications associated with the administration of heparin. If a 
trial cannulation is not possible, it is best to perform the ini-
tial cannulation of the new access at the patient’s midweek 
treatment. Performing the initial cannulation midweek helps 
minimize such complications as fluid overload and elevated 
chemistry test results associated with dialysis after a long 
weekend interval.
B. “Wet needle” technique.  To ensure that the needle is placed 
properly, needle placement should be confirmed with a nor -
mal saline flush before connecting the needles to the blood 
pump and starting the pump. Blood return alone is not 
enough to show good needle placement. One option to check 
for proper needle placement is the use of “wet” needles. The 
needle is purged of air and the saline in the attached syringe 
is used to flush the needle. If an infiltration has occurred, the 
normal saline is less harmful to the surrounding AV fistula tis-
sue. The wet needle also prevents the risk for a blood spray 
or spill if dry needles are used for cannulation and the caps 
are opened to “bleed out” air from the needle. Opening of the 
needle tubing cap creates a risk for blood exposure to the di-
alysis team member, patient, and nearby patients.
C. Needle with a “backeye.” A needle with a backeye should always 
be used for the arterial needle to maximize the flow from the 
access and reduce the need for flipping the needle.
D. Needle size selection.  Needle size selection for the initial can-
nulation is critical. Visual and tactile examinations allow the 
cannulator to determine which needle gauge would be most 
appropriate, based on the size of the vessel. One can place a 
17G or a 16G needle with its protective cap in place (prevents 
needle stick) over the cannulation site. One then compares the 
vein size with the needle size with and without a tourniquet 
being applied. If the needle is larger than the vein when the 
tourniquet is applied, then that particular needle size is too 
large and such a needle may infiltrate in the course of cannula-
tion. One should use a needle size that is equal to or smaller 
than the vein (without the tourniquet). The smallest needle 
available, usually a 17G, typically is used for initial cannula-
tion attempts. It is important to keep in mind that blood flow 
delivered by a 17G needle is limited.
Prepump arterial monitoring is recommended to en -
sure that blood pump speed does not exceed a flow that the 
needle can easily provide. Prepump arterial pressure should 
not exceed −250 mm Hg. Based on performance of the fistula 
using a 17G needle, the decision to increase the needle size for 
subsequent cannulation can be made. A 17G needle ordinarily 
will not deliver more than 250 mL/min blood flow, and a 16G 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   109 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
110
needle will not deliver a blood flow rate greater than 350 mL/
min. Progression from the 17G to larger needles depends on 
adequate vessel size and access flow.
E. Initial cannulation procedure
1. Apply a tourniquet to the access arm.
2. Disinfect the access site per unit protocol.
3. Attach a 10-mL syringe filled with 8 mL of normal saline 
solution to the needle, but do not prime the needle until
immediately before the cannulation.
4. Grasp the needle by its butterfly wings and prime the nee-
dle with normal saline until all the air has been purged.
Clamp the needle closed. Remove the protective cap and
immediately proceed with the cannulation.
5. Carefully cannulate the fistula using a 25° insertion angle.
When blood flashback  is observed (the needle may need
to be unclamped to see the blood flashback), flatten the an-
gle of the needle, parallel to the skin, and advance it slowly 
into the fistula lumen.
6. When the needle is in the vessel, remove the tourniquet
and tape the needle securely per unit protocol. If blood
flashback is visible, aspirate back 1–5 mL with the 10-mL 
syringe.
7. Flush the needle with the normal saline solution and
clamp. The syringe must aspirate and flush with ease. Mon-
itor for signs or symptoms of infiltration. Patients usually
experience immediate sharp pain upon infiltration of sa -
line or blood into the tissues.
8. Repeat steps 1–7 for the second needle unless blood return 
via a venous catheter is planned (see what follows).
F. One needle technique with return using a venous catheter.  In patients 
who still have a venous catheter in place, one does not need 
to necessarily begin dialysis with the new fistula using two 
needles. The risk of infiltration is much higher with the blood 
return (dialyzer outflow) needle. For the first 2 or 3 treatments, 
the blood can be returned via the venous catheter. Next, dialy-
sis can be done using two needles in the fistula, and only after 
several treatments have been successful is the venous catheter 
removed.
 X. ARTERIOVENOUS GRAFTS. As described at the outset of this chapter, 
AV grafts are less desirable than AV fistulas, primarily because 
of their lower long-term patency rates and greater need for en-
dovascular interventions to maintain patency. AV grafts do have 
some advantages, including a large surface area for needle place-
ment, easy cannulation, short maturation time, and easy surgical 
handling characteristics.
Most AV grafts placed in the United States are composed 
of expanded PTFE. The choice of synthetic or biologic material 
should be based on the surgeon’s preference and experience. Use 
of cryopreserved vein grafts, especially those placed in the thigh, 
is associated with a higher risk of infection. Short grafts have no 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   110 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 111
advantage over long grafts in terms of patency and longevity. 
Tapered grafts, externally supported grafts, or elastic grafts do 
not provide results better than standard PTFE grafts. Modifica-
tion of the distal anastomosis of PTFE grafts with a venous cuff 
may decrease venous stenosis and increase graft patency. Newer 
heparin-bonded materials in grafts are being used, but they do 
not appear to have any long-term advantages.
A. Potential AV graft locations
1. Common locations. Grafts may be placed in straight, looped, or 
curved configurations (Fig. 6.4). The common initial sites 
for AV graft placement are a straight graft from the radial 
artery at the wrist to the basilic vein; a loop graft in the fore-
arm from the brachial artery to the basilic vein (Fig. 6.5); 
or an upper arm graft from brachial artery to axillary vein 
(Fig. 6.6). Patient-specific features and projected time on 
dialysis help determine location; a distal graft in the non-
dominant arm is generally preferred initially. While this ap-
proach preserves proximal arm sites for future placement 
FIGURE 6.4 Various configuration and sites for AV graft placement. (Reprinted with 
permission from Paulson WD, Ram SJ, Zibari GB.  Vascular access: anatomy, examination, 
management. Semin Nephrol. 2002;22:183-194.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   111 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
112
of a fistula, distal grafts are associated with more frequent 
episodes of thrombosis. A distal graft (e.g., straight forearm 
graft from radial artery to an antecubital fossa vein) can 
sometimes be used to mature a proximal downstream vein 
for future AV fistula construction.
2. Uncommon locations.  The axillary artery can be used as the
source of a loop graft in the upper extremity. The graft can 
extend from the arm to the internal jugular vein to bypass 
FIGURE 6.6 Upper arm AV graft. (Reprinted with permission from Atlas of Dialysis 
 Vascular Access—www.fistulafirst.org.)
FIGURE 6.5 Forearm loop AV graft. (Reprinted with permission from Atlas of Dialysis 
Vascular Access—http://www.fistulafirst.org.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   112 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 113
ipsilateral subclavian vein stenosis. An AV graft can also be 
placed in the thigh, but then there is a higher associated 
complication rate. A chest wall axilloaxillary (necklace) graft 
is another option when other sites have been exhausted. 
Multiple other sites including an axillary artery–to–femoral 
vein graft can be used, depending on the individual patient 
and the experience and skills of the surgeon.
B. Surgical placement. Prophylactic antibiotics are often adminis -
tered just prior to the operation. The anastomosis should be 
made between the end of the graft and the side of the vein 
or artery to minimize interference with blood flow through 
the native vessels. Some studies suggest that nonpenetrating 
clips may be superior to conventional sutures by avoiding en -
dothelial penetration. A clip should be placed at the arterial 
and venous anastomoses for identification during subsequent 
angiography.
C. Postoperative care. This is similar to care after creation of an AV 
fistula. The extremity is kept elevated for several days. Graft 
function is checked regularly by assessing for venous pulsa-
tion, thrill, and bruit. There is no point in doing arm exercises 
to hasten maturation.
D. Maturation. A PTFE graft should not be cannulated for at least 
2  weeks after placement and is considered mature when 
edema and erythema have resolved and the graft course is 
easily palpable. Adhesion between the graft and the subcu-
taneous tunnel to prevent hematoma formation requires at 
least 2–3 weeks. Cannulation of a graft that cannot be easily 
palpated or in an edematous site invites inaccurate needle in-
sertion, leading to hematoma formation or frank laceration. 
Patients with persistent arm edema that fails to respond to 
arm elevation should have an imaging study to evaluate the 
status of their central veins.
1. Early-use grafts. Several early-use grafts have been introduced 
for immediate postoperative access to avoid risks associated 
with central venous catheters. The performance of a multi-
layered, self-sealing polyurethane graft is comparable to that 
of a conventional PTFE graft and allows for early access. Its 
placement requires more skill than placement of a conven-
tional PTFE graft because the risk of graft kinking and twist-
ing within the tunnel is somewhat higher. Composite grafts 
should not be cannulated for at least 24 hours after place-
ment, and not until swelling around the surgical wound has 
resolved and the graft can be easily palpated. A self-sealing 
graft composed of heparin-bonded polycarbonate that is 
immediately available for puncture has been developed.
2. Autologous tissue grafts.  Preliminary experience with autolo -
gous, tissue engineered vascular grafts has been encour -
aging (Wystrychowski, 2013). However, it is not known to 
what extent use of such grafts will prevent long-term com-
plications and how resistant they will be to leakage under 
repeated punctures for regular dialysis.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   113 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
114
XI. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF AV FISTULAS AND GRAFTS. Physical exami-
nation is a noninvasive and cost-effective test that is emerging
as an important tool in the evaluation of an AV access. Multiple
studies have demonstrated that physical examination can ac -
curately detect and localize stenotic lesions in a great majority
of patients with an AV access. Physical examination can be very
helpful not only in the postoperative monitoring of a new graft or
fistula but also in the evaluation of access dysfunction. The latter 
topic is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
A. Inspection. Examination should not be limited to the site of the 
AV access but should also include the remaining part of arm, 
shoulder, breast, neck, and face. Presence of swelling in any 
of these areas should be recorded and raise the suspicion of a 
downstream stenosis. The presence of collateral veins should 
also indicate downstream stenosis. Any scars on the chest wall 
should be carefully examined for evidence of previous catheter 
insertion sites. The presence of face, neck, or breast swelling 
usually is due to central venous stenosis.
B. Palpation and auscultation
1. Pulse. Normally, an AV access demonstrates a soft pulse
that is easily compressed by the application of gentle pres-
sure. In the presence of a downstream stenosis (outflow
stenosis), the pulse becomes augmented (hyperpulsatile,
water-hammer pulse). Often, a water-hammer pulse can
be seen as strong pulsation on inspection. The clinical his-
tory that goes with this scenario is frequently the presence
of prolonged bleeding after removal of the access needles. 
 In  contrast to the water-hammer pulse, a feeble pulse ( flat
access, hypopulsation) indicates an upstream stenosis. The 
clinical history that goes with a feeble pulse often includes
inability to aspirate blood from the arterial needle (needle
pulling negative pressure). The access is usually “plump” up-
stream to a stenosis and “flat” downstream from a stenosis.
2. Thrill. The thrill of an AV access is a “buzz” that can be felt
by the examining fingers. The thrill can be continuous or
discontinuous. Normally, there is a continuous nature to
the thrill except at the arterial anastomosis where the thrill 
normally is discontinuous. The quality of the thrill should
be evaluated from the anastomosis all the way to the chest 
wall (many a times cephalic arch stenosis gives a discon-
tinuous thrill at the cephalic arch area in the anterior part
of the shoulder). In the presence of a stenosis, the thrill be-
comes discontinuous; frequently, a systolic thrill can be felt 
immediately downstream from a stenosis.
3. Auscultation. Auscultation can be performed to assess the
quality of the bruit in the AV access. As with palpation for a 
thrill, auscultation for a bruit allows for the detection and
localization of a stenosis by presence of a continuous ver -
sus discontinuous bruit.
C. Pulse augmentation and arm elevation tests.  There are two addi-
tional tests that can be used to quickly examine an AV access. 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   114 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 115
The pulse augmentation test evaluates the inflow  segment 
while the arm elevation test assesses the outflow tract.
1. Pulse augmentation. This is performed by a complete occlu-
sion of the access several centimeters beyond the arterial
anastomosis and evaluation of the strength of the pulse.
The test is considered normal when the portion of fistula
upstream from the occluding finger demonstrates an aug -
mentation of pulse. With an AV fistula, the presence of
side branches can be detected using the pulse augmenta-
tion test. Upon occlusion of the outflow of an AV access by
the examining finger, two things should normally occur.
(1) The thrill should disappear. (2) The part of the access
upstream to the occluding finger should become hyperpul-
satile (augment). If the thrill persists after the occlusion of
the access, the presence of an accessory outflow pathway
should be suspected. In this case, the access pulse does
not augment as the anticipated increase in pressure is dis-
sipated by the presence of the accessory pathway. One can
often pinpoint the location of the side branch by moving
the occluding finger toward the anastomosis of the fistula.
When the thrill disappears and the access augments, the
examiner’s occluding finger will have just passed the site of 
the side branch. Moving the finger away from the anasto-
mosis should bring the thrill back. This maneuver confirms 
the location of the side branch.
2. Arm elevation test. This is performed by elevating the extrem-
ity and examining the normal collapse of an AV fistula . 
The test is considered abnormal when the fistula remains
plump after arm elevation and fails to collapse. This indi-
cates the presence of downstream stenosis.
XII. GENERAL ISSUES RELATING TO CANNULATION OF EITHER AV FISTULAS
OR GRAFTS
A. Skin preparation. An aseptic technique must be used for all can-
nulation procedures.
B. Anesthesia. In pain-sensitive patients, a topical anesthetic 
cream can be applied to the skin about 30 min utes prior to 
puncture, but this is rarely required. Most patients, especially 
those with new accesses, require subcutaneously injected li-
docaine prior to needle cannulation. Injected anesthetic is 
especially helpful when manipulation of the needle is antici-
pated. Patients with established needle tracts often tolerate 
direct puncture without anesthesia and some find the anes-
thetic injection more painful than a direct stick.
C. Use of tourniquets for AV fistulas.  A tourniquet or blood pressure 
cuff should be used to enlarge and stabilize the vein for easier 
cannulation of AV fistulas. A tourniquet should not be used 
during the dialysis treatment; a fistula that works only when a 
tourniquet is in place is still underdeveloped, usually because 
of inflow stenosis, and such a fistula needs more time or re-
evaluation by the vascular access team prior to use.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   115 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
116
If a tourniquet is not required for cannulation and the 
fistula does not soften with arm elevation, a downstream (out-
flow) stenosis may be present and should be searched for using 
imaging studies.
D. Needle size. As noted above, during the initial use of a perma-
nent vascular access, especially a fistula, some nephrologists 
recommend the use of small (16G to 17G) needles and low 
blood flow rates. In mature accesses, larger (15G) needles are 
needed to support blood flow rates (>350 mL/min) required 
for high-efficiency dialysis.
E. Needle position, spacing, and orientation.  Two needles are placed 
into the dilated vein(s) of the fistula or into the graft. The 
needle leading to the dialyzer blood inlet is always placed in 
the more upstream segment but at least 3 cm away from the 
arterial anastomotic site. This upstream or “arterial” needle 
may point either upstream or downstream. Pointing the up-
stream needle in a downstream direction is popular in some 
countries, the rationale being that the “flap” left behind when 
the needle is withdrawn tends to close more naturally with the 
flow of blood. However, there is no controlled evidence to sug-
gest that this is the case. The downstream (outlet or “venous”) 
needle should be inserted pointing downstream, approxi-
mately 5 cm downstream to the upstream (arterial) needle (to 
minimize recirculation). One study found that recirculation 
does not occur, even with needles spaced as closely as 2.5 cm 
from one another (Rothera, 2011). Some caregivers rotate 
each needle 180 degrees along the needle axis after insertion 
to prevent potential injury to the deep wall of the vessel by the 
needle point. This issue has not been systematically studied 
but generally is not recommended.
1. Risk of inflow/outflow needle reversal.  Special care must be 
taken when cannulating forearm loop grafts. In more 
than 80% of such grafts, the arterial limb will be medial 
(ulnar), but in the remainder the arterial limb may lie on 
the radial side of the forearm. Reversal of needle place-
ment may occur unless the dialysis clinic staff knows that 
blood in this particular graft flows in the opposite-to-
usual direction. Reverse needle placement substantially 
increases the amount of recirculation (to > 20%) and can 
result in inadequate delivery of dialysis. This happens 
more commonly than one would expect, as patients may 
have access surgery at another center and a diagram of 
the inserted access might not be readily available. When 
in doubt, a careful physical examination with transient 
occlusion of the access and palpation on either side of the 
occluding finger for pulsations will reveal the direction 
of blood flow in most cases. For reference, a “road map” 
diagram of the access from the surgeon who placed the 
access is very helpful.
F. Repeated punctures: Needle rotation. The manner in which needles 
are inserted affects the long-term patency and survival of 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   116 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 117
accesses, particularly of AV fistulas. The “ladder” or rotational 
approach uses the entire length of the access without local-
izing needle sticks to any two areas. Grouping needle sticks 
in one or two specific areas can weaken the wall of a fistula, 
producing an aneurysm.
G. Buttonhole cannulation tips.  In AV fistulas, one technique 
of placing access needles is the so-called “buttonhole” 
method. The AV fistula is always punctured through a lim-
ited number of sites, the use of which may be rotated. The 
needle must be placed precisely through the same needle 
tract used previously. After the buttonhole has been devel-
oped using sharp needles, special “dulled” needles are used 
to minimize laceration of the buttonhole tract. Initial en-
thusiasm for the buttonhole approach has been tempered 
with suggestions that its use may lead to increased infec-
tious complications and may do little to prolong AV fistula 
longevity (MacRae, 2014; Muir, 2014). The degree of success 
with the buttonhole approach may be highly technique de-
pendent. There is no published experience with the button-
hole method in AV grafts, and it should not be tried in AV 
grafts without further study.
Buttonhole cannulation requires strict adherence to 
proper infection control measures as well as technique to pre-
vent serious infection and technique-related complications 
(Dinwiddie, 2013).
1. Employ proper buttonhole cannulation procedure steps
(skin prep, proper scab removal, re-prep of the skin, and
proper use of blunt needles).
2. Use the needle wings to help guide the needle gently into
the skin and vessel or conduit—excessive pressure prevents 
feedback to the cannulator’s fingers to feel resistance.
3. Always cannulate the buttonhole under consistent condi-
tions; if a tourniquet was used to establish the buttonhole,
it should be used consistently, as otherwise the tissues in
the buttonhole tract may not align.
4. Consider the patient as a self-cannulation candidate. Ben -
efits can include patient empowerment, less pain, and ease 
of cannulation, as the patient has to master cannulation of
only his or her own specific access.
H. Preventing and dealing with infiltration.  Infiltrations with cannula -
tion can occur before dialysis, during dialysis with the blood 
pump running, or after dialysis in the course of needle re-
moval. One should monitor closely for signs and symptoms of 
infiltration. A quick response to a needle infiltration can help 
minimize damage to the access.
1. If the infiltration occurs after the administration of heparin, 
care must be taken to properly clot the needle tract and not
the fistula. In some cases, the decision to leave the needle in 
place and cannulate another site may be appropriate. The
immediate application of ice can help decrease pain and
the size of the infiltration and may decrease bleeding time.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   117 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
118
2. Use caution when taping needles. Avoid lifting up on the
needle after it is in the vein. An improper needle flip or tap-
ing procedure can cause an infiltration.
3. If the fistula is infiltrated, it is best to rest the fistula for at
least one treatment. If this is not possible, the next cannu-
lation should be downstream of  the site of the infiltration.
If the patient still has a central venous catheter in place,
one can restart use of the fistula with one needle, return-
ing blood via the venous catheter, and later advance to two 
needles, a larger needle size, and greater blood flow rates as 
the access allows.
4. Proper needle removal prevents postdialysis infiltrations.
Prior to removing the needle, apply the gauze dressing over
the needle site, but do not yet apply pressure. Next, carefully
remove the needle at approximately the same angle as it was 
inserted. This prevents dragging the needle across the pa-
tient’s skin. Using too steep of an angle during needle removal
may cause the needle’s cutting edge to puncture the vein wall.
5. Do not apply pressure to the puncture site until the needle
has been completely removed.
6. Notify the nephrologist as soon as a cannulation injury has 
occurred. In some case, fistula rest is adequate. In others,
an intervention may be required.
I. Hemostasis postdialysis. Following needle removal, direct pres-
sure over the site, usually with the tip of one or two fingers 
pushed firmly but not so hard as to occlude flow, is the best 
method for achieving hemostasis. One must prevent hema-
toma formation at the access site while controlling bleeding 
at the skin exit site. Pressure must be held for at least 10 min-
utes before checking the needle site for bleeding. Adhesive 
bandages should not be applied until complete hemostasis 
has been achieved.
Prolonged bleeding ( >20 min utes) may indicate in -
creased intra-access pressure due to an unsuspected outflow 
stenosis. Bleeding also is common in patients receiving thera-
peutic doses of anticoagulants such as warfarin. Another cause 
of bleeding is heparin escape from a venous catheter lock in 
patients who are being transitioned from a venous catheter to 
an AV fistula, where the venous catheter is being used to return 
blood during initial fistula test use.
References and Suggested Readings
Agarwal AK. Central vein stenosis: current concepts. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 
2009;16:360–370.
Agarwal R, McDougal G. Buzz in the axilla: a new physical sign in hemodialysis fore-
arm graft evaluation. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001;38:853–857.
Asif A, et al. Early arteriovenous fistula failure: a logical proposal for when and how to 
intervene. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006;1:332–339.
Asif A, et al. Vascular mapping techniques: advantages and disadvantages. J Nephrol. 
2007;20:299–303.
Asif A, et al. Accuracy of physical examination in the detection of arteriovenous graft 
stenosis. Semin Dial. 2008;21:85–88.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   118 11/10/14   1:56 am
Chapter 6 / Arteriovenous Fistulas and Grafts: The Basics 119
Beathard GA. An algorithm for the physical examination of early fistula failure. Semin 
Dial. 2005;18:331–335.
Bharat A, Jaenicke M, and Shenoy S. A novel technique of vascular anastomosis to 
prevent juxta-anastomotic stenosis following arteriovenous fistula creation. J Vasc 
Surg. 2012;55:274–80.
Campos PR, et al. Stenosis in hemodialysis arteriovenous fistula: evaluation and treat-
ment. Hemodial Int. 2006;10:152–161.
Campos PR, et al. Accuracy of physical examination and intra-access pressure in 
the detection of stenosis in hemodialysis arteriovenous fistula. Semin Dial. 
2008;21:269–273.
Caroli A, et al; for the ARCH project Consortium. Validation of a patient-specific 
 hemodynamic computational model for surgical planning of vascular access in 
hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int. 2013;84:1237–1245.
Chemla ES, et al. Complex bypasses and fistulas for difficult hemodialysis access: a 
prospective, single-center experience. Semin Dial. 2006;19:246–250.
Coskun I, et al. Hemodynamic effects of left upper extremity arteriovenous fistula on 
ipsilateral internal mammary coronary artery bypass graft. Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2013;61:663–667.
Crowther MA, et al. Low-intensity warfarin is ineffective for prevention of PTFE graft 
failure in patients on hemodialysis: a randomized controlled trial. Clin J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2002;13:2331–2337.
Dember LM, et al; Dialysis Access Consortium (DAC) Study Group. Effect of clopi-
drogrel on early failure of arteriovenous fistulas for hemodialysis: a randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;299:2164–2171.
Dinwiddie LC, et al. What nephrologists need to know about vascular access cannula-
tion. Semin Dial. 2013;26:315–322.
Drawz PE, et al. A simple tool to predict end-stage renal disease within 1 year in elderly 
adults with advanced chronic kidney disease. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013;61:762–768.
Feldman L, et al. Effect of arteriovenous hemodialysis shunt location on cardiac events 
in patients having coronary artery bypass graft using an internal thoracic artery. 
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:214A (abstract).
Gradzki R, et al. Use of ACE inhibitors is associated with prolonged survival of arterio-
venous grafts. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001;38:1240–1244.
Hoggard J, et al. ASDIN guidelines for venous access in patients with chronic kidney 
disease: a position statement from the American Society of Diagnostic and Inter-
ventional Nephrology Clinical Practice Committee and the Association for Vascu-
lar Access. Semin Dial. 2008;21:186–191.
Huijbregts HJ, Blankestijn PJ. Dialysis access—guidelines for current practice. Eur 
J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2006;31:284–287.
Jaberi A, et al. Arteriovenous fistulas for hemodialysis: application of high-fre-
quency US to assess vein wall morphology for cannulation readiness. Radiology . 
2011;216:616–624.
Kaufman JS, et al. Randomized controlled trial of clopidogrel plus aspirin to prevent 
hemodialysis access graft thrombosis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003;14:2313–2321.
Konner K. A primer on the AV fistula—Achilles’ heel, but also Cinderella of haemodi-
alysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1999;14:2094–2098.
Lin CC, et al. Effect of far infrared therapy on arteriovenous fistula maturation: an 
open-label randomized controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;62:304–311.
Lok CE, Davidson I. Optimal choice for dialysis access for chronic kidney disease pa-
tients: developing a life plan for dialysis access. Semin Nephrol. 2012;32:530–537.
Lok CE, et al. Cumulative patency of cotemporary fistulas versus grafts (2000–2010). 
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;8:810–818.
MacRae JM, et al. Arteriovenous fistula survival and needling technique: long-term 
results from a randomized buttonhole trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;63:636–642.
Malovrh M. Native arteriovenous fistula: preoperative evaluation. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2002;39:1218–1225.
Maya ID, et al. Vascular access stenosis: comparison of arteriovenous grafts and fistu-
las. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004;44:859–865.
Moist LM, et al. Optimal hemodialysis vascular access in the elderly patient. Semin 
Dial. 2012;25:640–648.
Moist LM, et al. Education in vascular access. Semin Dial. 2013;26:148–153.
Muir CA, et al. Buttonhole cannulation and clinical outcomes in a home hemodialysis 
cohort and systematic review. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;9:110–119.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   119 11/10/14   1:56 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
120
Murea M, et al. Risk of catheter-related bloodstream infection in elderly patients on 
hemodialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;9:764–770.
National Kidney Foundation. 2006 NKF-K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for vascu-
lar access: update 2006. Am J Kidney Dis. 2006;48(suppl 1):S177–S277.
Ohira S, Kon T, Imura T. Evaluation of primary failure in native AV-fistulae (early fistula 
failure). Hemodial Int. 2006;10:173–179.
Okada S, Shenoy S. Arteriovenous access for hemodialysis: preoperative assessment 
and planning. J Vasc Access. 2014;15(suppl 7):1–5.
Ortega T, et al. The timely construction of arteriovenous fistulas: a key to reducing 
morbidity and mortality and to improving cost management. Nephrol Dial Trans-
plant. 2005;20:598–603.
Palmes D, et al. Perforating vein fistula is superior to forearm fistula in elderly haemo-
dialysis patients with diabetes and arterial hypertension. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2011;26:3309–3314.
Paul BZS, Feeny CM.  Combining the modified Allen’s test and pulse oximetry for eval-
uating ulnar collateral circulation to the hand for radial artery catheterization of 
the ED patient. Calif J Emerg Med. 2003;4:89-91.
Pirozzi N, et al. Microsurgery and preventive haemostasis for autogenous radial–  
cephalic direct wrist access in adult patients with radial artery internal diameter 
below 1.6 mm. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25:520–525.
Rothera C, et al. The influence of between-needle cannulation distance on the efficacy 
of hemodialysis treatments. Hemodial Int. 2011;15:546–552.
Saad TF, et al. Cardiovascular implantable device leads in CKD and ESRD patients: 
review and recommendations for practice. Semin Dial. 2013;26;114–123.
Saucy F, et al. Is intra-operative blood flow predictive for early failure of radiocephalic 
arteriovenous fistula? Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25:862–867.
Shenoy S. Surgical anatomy of upper arm: what is needed for AVF planning. J Vasc 
Access 2009;10: 223–232.
Tangri N, et al. A predictive model for progression of chronic kidney disease to kidney 
failure. JAMA. 2011;305:1553–1559.
Tangri N, et al. Validation of the kidney failure risk equation in an International Con-
sortium [abstract SA-OR055]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:84A.
Vachharajani TJ. Diagnosis of arteriovenous fistula dysfunction. Semin Dial. 
2012;25;445–450.
Vachharajani TJ, et al. Re-evaluating the fistula first initiative in octogenarians on he-
modialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:1663–1667.
Vaux E. Effect of buttonhole cannulation with a polycarbonate peg on in-center hemodi-
alysis fistula outcomes: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;62:81–88.
Wystrychowski W , et al. First human use of an allogeneic tissue-engineered vascular 
graft for hemodialysis access. J Vasc Surg. 2014, in press.
Xue JL, et al. The association of initial hemodialysis access type with mortality out-
comes in elderly Medicare ESRD patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42:1013–1019.
Web References
American Nephrology Nurses’ Association “Save the Vein” project. http://www  
.annanurse.org/resources/save-the-vein-campaign.
American Society of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology. http://www.asdin.org/.
Atlas of Dialysis Vascular Access. http://www.theisn.org/hemodialysis/education-by-
topic.
Fistula First initiative: http://www.fistulafirst.org.
Physical examination of arteriovenous fistula. http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=m1-C61AOY3Q.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch006.indd   120 11/10/14   1:56 am