121
Venous Catheter Access: 
The Basics
Michael Allon and Arif Asif
 I. OVERVIEW. Patients being dialyzed with venous catheters do not do 
as well as those using an arteriovenous access. Catheter patients 
develop infections more often, they have higher levels of inflam-
matory markers such as C-reactive protein, and they die more 
frequently. It is unclear if these associative risks reflect a differ -
ent patient population receiving catheters, some risk factor that 
occurs when AV accesses fail and a catheter must be placed, or if 
they are due completely to some property of catheter use per se. 
Probably all three are important. Survival rates for catheters are 
about 60% at 6 months and 40% at 1 year if revisions are included. 
Inadequate blood flow through venous catheters remains a signif-
icant problem. Nominal flow >400 mL/min (actual flow 350 mL/
min) can rarely be obtained, and usually flow is limited to a range 
closer to 300 mL/min. This limits use of venous catheters in larger 
patients and results in a lower than average urea reduction ratio 
(URR) or fractional urea clearance (Kt/V).
In the chronic setting, venous catheters are utilized as a 
long-term vascular access for patients in whom an AV access 
cannot be readily created. Such patients include small children, 
some diabetic patients with severe vascular disease, patients 
who are morbidly obese, and patients who have undergone mul-
tiple AV access insertions and in whom additional sites for AV 
access insertion are not available. Additional indications include 
patients with cardiomyopathy unable to sustain adequate blood 
pressures or access flows. Whereas catheters were initially 
favored for more frequent dialysis, there has been good recent 
experience with nocturnal dialysis and short daily dialysis using 
AV fistulas or grafts. There has been renewed discussion about 
the potential acceptability of venous catheter access for chronic 
dialysis in some elderly patients, especially those with comorbidi-
ties and limited expected life span (Drew and Lok, 2014). Infec-
tion rates with venous catheters in elderly patients ( >75 years) 
are relatively low, one-third that in younger patients (Murea, 
2014). Adherence to hand washing and catheter-care protocols 
such as those suggested by the U.S. Centers for Disease control 
has resulted in marked overall reduction of dialysis catheter 
infection rates (Patel, 2013).
7
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   121 09/10/14   1:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
122
II. CATHETER TYPES AND DESIGN
A. Cuffed versus uncuffed.  Use of an uncuffed catheter for periods
of time beyond several weeks results in a relatively high rate 
of infection and is not recommended. Dacron or felt cuffs 
bonded to the catheter reduce the incidence of line-related 
infection and of catheter migration and must be used when-
ever a longer-term use of the catheter is anticipated, or when 
it is anticipated that a patient will be discharged from the hos-
pital with a catheter remaining in place.
B. Design issues. Dual-lumen venous catheters are available in a 
“double-D” configuration or where the two lumens are in some 
related, side-by-side configuration. Coaxial catheters are now 
less frequently used. A side-by-side port design permits the 
intravenous portion of the catheter to be split into two parts 
close to the termination point. This results in a softer, more 
pliable catheter end, a greater separation of inlet and outlet 
ports, and perhaps a lower recirculation rate. The cuffed Tesio 
catheter system (used primarily for chronic dialysis) consists 
of two completely separate catheters, each made of soft sili-
cone material, one for inflow and one for outflow.
C. Antiseptic impregnation.  Some dialysis catheters or their cuffs 
are impregnated with antiseptic or silver-based coatings in 
an attempt to inhibit bacterial growth. At present there are no 
large studies that demonstrate improved outcomes with such 
catheters.
III. ACUTE DIALYSIS
A. Indications. Venous catheters are commonly used for acute
angioaccess in the following patients: (a) those with acute 
renal failure; (b) those requiring hemodialysis or hemoper -
fusion for overdose or intoxication; (c) those with late-stage 
chronic kidney disease needing urgent hemodialysis but 
without available mature access; (d) those on maintenance 
hemodialysis who have lost effective use of their permanent 
access and require temporary access until permanent access 
function can be reestablished; (e) patients requiring plasma -
pheresis; ( f) peritoneal dialysis patients whose abdomens 
are being rested prior to new peritoneal catheter placement 
(usually for severe peritonitis that required peritoneal dialy -
sis catheter removal); and (g) transplant recipients needing 
temporary hemodialysis during severe rejection episodes. 
The renascent interest in urgent start peritoneal dialysis, dis -
cussed in Chapter 24, and earlier referral of patients with CKD 
for access placement should lower the need for urgent place-
ment of central venous catheters for hemodialysis.
B. Insertion location.  Available sites include the right and left 
internal jugular vein, the femoral veins, and the subclavian 
veins. One order of preference for these various sites is shown 
in Table 7.1. The optimal insertion site is the right internal 
jugular vein because the venous pathway to the right atrium 
is relatively short and straight. The subclavian site should 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   122 09/10/14   1:06 am
123Chapter 7 / Venous Catheter Access: The Basics
generally be avoided because it is associated with a higher 
incidence of insertion-related complications (pneumothorax, 
hemothorax, subclavian artery perforation, brachial plexus 
injury) and a high incidence (up to 40%) of central venous ste-
nosis. Use of the left internal jugular vein for acute dialysis 
is not optimal, as this represents a relatively long and twisty 
pathway to the right atrium; if subsequent chronic dialysis is 
needed, ideally one would like to leave the upper extremity 
central venous vessels alone to limit the rate of future stenosis. 
The femoral vein approach has several potential advantages. 
Placement tends to be simpler, especially for inexperienced 
operators. There is no risk of pneumothorax, hemothorax, 
or brachial plexus injury, although femoral arterial puncture 
and retroperitoneal bleed can occur. Originally, it was thought 
that the femoral approach had a higher risk of infection, but 
recent experience from the Cathedia Study Group found com-
parable rates of infection and time to catheter tip colonization 
(14 days) with femoral and internal jugular catheters (Dugué, 
2012). The femoral approach is useful for performing the ini-
tial hemodialysis treatment in patients who present with acute 
pulmonary edema because the patient’s head and chest can 
remain elevated during insertion. The infection risk with fem-
oral catheters is increased in obese patients (BMI > 28 kg/m
2), 
although the extent of this risk probably depends on the distri-
bution of body fat. When femoral catheters are used, the length 
must be sufficient (usually at least 20 cm) so that the tip is in 
the inferior vena cava to permit better flow and to minimize 
recirculation. Another finding from the Cathedia Study was 
that delivered URR and Kt/V were similar with femoral and 
jugular catheters (Dugué, 2012). The European Best Practices 
 1. Right internal jugular
Critically ill and bed-bound with body mass index >28
Postoperative aortic aneurysm repair
Ambulatory patient/mobility required for rehabilitation
 2. Femoral
Critically ill and bed-bound with body mass index <24
Tracheostomy present or planned in near-term
Need for long-term hemodialysis access present, highly likely or planned
Emergency dialysis required plus inexperienced operator and/or no access 
to ultrasound
 3. Left internal jugular
Contraindications to right internal jugular and femoral sites
 4. Subclavian
Contraindications to internal jugular
Right side to be used preferentially
Source: Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Clark EG, Barsuk JH. Temporary 
hemodialysis catheters: recent advances. Kidney Int. 2014. doi:10.1038/ki.2014.162.
Selected Factors Favoring Different Temporary 
(Nontunneled) Hemodialysis Catheter Insertion Sites7.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   123 09/10/14   1:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
124
Group does not agree with the order of preference of insertion 
sites listed in Table 7.1, and gives second preference to the left 
internal jugular vein, and recommends that femoral catheters 
be discouraged (Vanholder, 2010).
C. Uncuffed versus cuffed catheter use.  The risk of infection of 
uncuffed catheters increases markedly after the first week. 
For this reason, the KDOQI 2006 vascular access guidelines 
recommend use of a cuffed catheter if the anticipated need 
for dialysis is longer than 1 week. They also recommend that 
femoral catheters in bed-bound patients not be left in place 
longer than 5 days. These recommendations, especially with 
regard to femoral catheters, may be a bit too stringent given 
the results of the Cathedia Study (Dugué, 2012), where median 
time to catheter tip colonization was 14 days. Once the like-
lihood of the need for prolonged dialysis is established, an 
uncuffed internal jugular catheter can be replaced with a 
cuffed catheter. In cases where a prolonged need for dialysis is 
likely at the outset, a cuffed catheter can be inserted initially, 
in the right internal jugular vein position if possible. Recently 
some success has been claimed using cuffed tunneled femoral 
catheters (Hingwala, 2014). This has the advantage of locat -
ing the exit site away from overhanging skin folds, and easy 
removal, as long as removal is done within several weeks of 
insertion. Placing a cuffed femoral catheter allows time for 
more definitive access site placement, whether it be for peri-
toneal dialysis or hemodialysis.
D. Anatomic variation and use of real-time ultrasound guid-
ance. The central veins of the neck exhibit anatomic variability 
(Fig. 7.1), and occasionally one of them may be absent. Atypi-
cal or ectatic carotid arteries are also a problem. With the use 
of ultrasound guidance, the rate of successful internal jugular 
puncture on first attempt increases markedly and the rate of 
FIGURE 7.1 Anatomic variability of internal jugular vein as viewed using ultrasound 
localization. (Modified from Caridi JG, et al. Sonographic guidance when using the right 
internal jugular vein for central vein access. Am J Roentgenol. 1998;171:1259–1263.)
Right
Lateral
Lateral
Skin
Anterior Left
1% 66%70%
14%
1%
1%0%
14% 14%
18%
carotid carotid
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   124 09/10/14   1:06 am
125Chapter 7 / Venous Catheter Access: The Basics
carotid artery punctures and hematoma is greatly reduced 
(Rabindranath, 2011). In the femoral approach, the femoral 
vein often is behind the artery, and this overlap worsens as one 
proceeds down from the inguinal ligament (Beaudoin, 2011). 
Here, too, the use of ultrasound helps reduce complications 
(Clark and Barsuk, 2014).
E. Simulation-based training for catheter insertion.  Venous catheter 
insertion for dialysis is a necessary skill for nephrology fellows 
to acquire, but many programs may not have resources to 
provide the required level of training. Simulation-based train-
ing has been proposed to remedy this, and provision of  such 
intensive training has resulted in improved catheter-related 
outcomes (Clark and Barsuk, 2014).
I V. INSERTION TECHNIQUE
A. Initial site preparation. The catheter should be inserted using an 
aseptic technique, with the operator wearing a sterile surgi-
cal gown and gloves in a maximum barrier protection envi-
ronment. Prior to surgical scrub, it is helpful to examine the 
selected site using ultrasound to ensure that the patient has 
a suitable vein in the selected location. The insertion site and 
surrounding areas should be cleansed with surgical scrub 
and draped appropriately (include shoulder and chest wall if 
a cuffed tunneled catheter is to be inserted). The ultrasound 
probe should be covered with a sterile sheath.
B. Internal jugular approach.  The ultrasound probe may be placed 
parallel to the long axis of the vessel and the cannulation 
needle inserted adjacent to the end or short axis of the probe. 
Alternatively, the probe may be placed perpendicular to the 
long axis of the vessel. This approach gives the vein the more 
typical appearance of a circle but limits the visualization of 
the needle. The vein typically collapses with gentle pressure of 
the probe, whereas the artery does not. Additionally, the vein 
diameter increases with Valsalva maneuver and can be easily 
observed with ultrasound. For internal jugular vein cannula -
tion as an example, the ultrasound probe is placed parallel and 
superior to the clavicle, over the groove between the sternal 
and clavicular heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. It is 
important to avoid inserting the catheter through the muscle, 
as this is uncomfortable for the patient and leads to catheter 
dysfunction as the neck is rotated.
1. Initial insertion of the guidewire through a 21G needle.  The site
for insertion is infiltrated with local anesthesia. Using real-
time ultrasound guidance, a 21G micropuncture needle
with an attached syringe is inserted into the vein. The
small needle limits potential complications if the carotid
artery is inadvertently punctured compared to a larger 18G 
needle, which is usually included in commercially avail-
able dialysis catheter trays. Under direct visualization, the
vein will be seen to gently push in before penetrati on of  
the anterior vein wall. The syringe is removed, and a 0.018″
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   125 09/10/14   1:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
126
guidewire is inserted through the needle. The guidewire is 
advanced. The position of the guidewire is confirmed using 
fluoroscopy.
2. Insertion of the dilator over the guidewire.  The needle is then
removed and a coaxial 5-French dilator is then advanced
over the guidewire. The guidewire and 3-French inner
translational dilator are removed, leaving the 5-French
outer dilator in place. A flow switch or stopcock is attached 
to the dilator to prevent the possibility of an air embolism.
3. Uncuffed catheter insertion.  The next step depends on
whether one is placing a noncuffed temporary or cuffed
tunneled catheter. For temporary catheter placement, a
standard 0.035″ guidewire is advanced into the vein and
then the 5-French dilator is removed, leaving the guidewire. 
In stepwise fashion, dilators of increasing size are passed
over the guidewire to progressively dilate the soft tissue
and venous tract; the dilator should move freely on the
guidewire. The dilator should not be forcefully advanced,
as it is possible for the dilator to get off axis and impinge
on the guidewire and perforate the vein and/or the medi-
astinum. Consequently, one does not need to advance the
entire length of the dilator as only the dilatation of the track 
from the skin to the vein is desired. If there is any doubt
as to location of the dilator or if there is hesitancy or dif-
ficulty in dilating the tract, fluoroscopy should be used to
assist in placement. The last dilator is then exchanged for
the temporary catheter, which is advanced over the guide-
wire into position. After securing the catheter in place, a
chest radiograph should be obtained for confirmation of
correct positioning and to check for any complications,
if a fluoroscope was not available during insertion. If the
patient requires long-term dialysis support, the temporary
noncuffed catheter, when located in the internal jugular
vein, may be safely converted to a cuffed tunneled catheter 
if there is no evidence of an exit-site infection.
4. Cuffed catheter insertion
a. Creating the skin exit site and tunnel.  For cuffed tunneled
catheter insertion, a small skin incision is made from the 
5-French dilator exit site extending laterally. The subcu -
taneous tissue is then exposed with blunt dissection, cre-
ating a subcutaneous pocket so that the catheter bend
will be kink-free. Further dissection is made to ensure
that the soft tissue around the 5-French dilator is free.
The catheter exit site is then located . This may be ac-
complished by using the fourth rib interspace landmark
technique, or the catheter length may be determined
more precisely by using a guidewire to measure the dis-
tance from the insertion site to the midright atrium. Us-
ing this measurement as a guide, the length of tunnel
may then be determined so that the cuff is within the
tunnel approximately 1–2 cm from the exit site.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   126 09/10/14   1:06 am
127Chapter 7 / Venous Catheter Access: The Basics
5. Inserting the catheter through the skin exit site.  Once the exit
site for the catheter is identified, the area is infiltrated
with local anesthesia; a puncture is made through the skin
using a number 11 knife blade inserted parallel to the skin. 
The knife is inserted to the widest point of the blade; this
incision accommodates most dual-lumen catheters. A
long needle is used to infiltrate the tunnel tract with local
anesthesia extending from the exit site to the venotomy
insertion site. The catheter is mounted on the end of the
tunneling device, and the tunneling device is pulled from
the exit site subcutaneously to the insertion site. The cuff
of the catheter is pulled into the tunnel, and the tunneling
device is then removed from the catheter.
6. Dilating the deep tissues and venous tract.  A guidewire (Benson
or angled glidewire) is now passed through the dilator into 
the inferior vena cava. Placement of the guidewire into
the inferior vena cava decreases the likelihood of cardiac
arrhythmias. The guidewire provided with most cath-
eter trays may also be used. The 5-French dilator is then
removed, and in stepwise fashion, dilators of increasing
size are passed over the guidewire in order to progressively 
dilate the soft tissue and venous tract. The dilator should
move freely on the guidewire. It is possible for the dilator to 
get off axis and impinge on the guidewire and perforate the 
vein and/or the mediastinum. In this context, one does not 
need to advance the entire length of the dilator as only the
dilatation of the track from the skin to the vein is required. 
If there is any doubt as to the location of the dilator or if
there is hesitancy or difficulty in dilating the tract, the fluo-
roscope should be used to verify proper positioning.
7. Completing catheter insertion. After the final dilation, the dila-
tor is inserted with peel-away sheath. As one inserts the
sheath, a resistance is felt as the sheath goes through the
soft tissue and then a final resistance as it enters the vein.
The dilator and sheath are then removed and the catheter
is threaded over the guidewire without using the sheath
and advanced through the venous tract into final position
(sheathless catheter insertion). One may need to slightly
torque the catheter in order to advance it through the tract. 
This maneuver decreases the possibility of air embolism
and may result in both a smaller venotomy and in less post-
procedure bleeding.
Alternatively, if the peel-away sheath is used, the 
sheath is advanced slightly and the dilator removed while 
occluding the sheath, leaving the guidewire in place to 
ensure access is available if there are any difficulties. The 
sheath should be grasped between the finger and thumb 
of one’s hand in order to occlude the sheath. This prevents 
bleeding and/or aspiration of air while leaving enough 
length of the sheath to insert the catheter. Once the dilator 
and guidewire have been removed, the catheter is threaded 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   127 09/10/14   1:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
128
over the wire and advanced into the opening of the sheath 
in such a way as to avoid twisting the catheter. The catheter 
is fed through the sheath. The catheter is pushed farther 
into the sheath, and the sheath is peeled downward toward 
the skin. As soon as the catheter is advanced maximally, the 
sheath is pulled out and then peeled down outside of the 
venotomy. This avoids the sheath creating a larger venous 
tract.
8. Setting and securing the catheter cuff. Once the sheath has been 
completely removed, the catheter is pulled back into the
tunnel so that the cuff now is approximately 1–2 cm from
the exit site. The catheter is now checked to ensure that it
is functioning properly. A 10-mL syringe should be able to
rapidly pull back blood without any shuttering if the cath-
eter is to deliver a blood flow >300 mL/min.
The venotomy insertion site at the neck is closed us-
ing appropriate suture after confirmation of adequate flow. 
Sutures should not be placed at the exit site as they serve as 
a nidus for infection. Additional suture is used to hold the 
catheter at the hub. Using “air knots” to secure the catheter 
hub increases patient comfort and decreases the likelihood 
of skin necrosis. The subcutaneous cuff will ultimately hold 
the catheter in position and anchor it to the subcutaneous 
tissue. Topical antibiotic ointment may be applied to the 
incisions and needle puncture sites, and a gauze dressing 
is applied.
C. Femoral approach.  Uncuffed catheters normally are used, but 
as noted earlier, cuffed catheters also may be inserted. The 
patient is placed flat on the back with the knee slightly flexed 
and leg abducted and rotated outward. The groin is shaved, 
cleansed, painted with antiseptic, and draped. The femoral 
vein should be located 2–4 cm below the inguinal ligament 
using a 21G needle filled with heparinized saline or with 
local anesthetic. As noted earlier, real-time ultrasound guid-
ance improves the chance of a successful procedure. A small 
amount of local anesthetic can be infiltrated around the vein 
to prevent venous spasm. Once the vein is located, the small-
gauge needle is withdrawn and replaced with an 18G needle. 
A guidewire is inserted through the needle into the vein. 
It is important for the guidewire to be freely movable back 
and forth after it is fully inserted. If the guidewire feels tight, 
chances are that it has entered a side branch of the iliofemo-
ral vein. Under these circumstances catheter insertion should 
not be attempted; rather, the guidewire should be withdrawn 
completely, the angle of the needle in the vein changed (some-
times the needle hub has to be lowered to the skin level to 
be almost parallel to the vein), and the guidewire reinserted. 
After free to-and-fro movement of the inserted guidewire is 
achieved, the 18G needle is removed and the cannula rein-
serted. The remainder of the procedure then generally follows 
the description for jugular vein insertion, above.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   128 09/10/14   1:06 am
129Chapter 7 / Venous Catheter Access: The Basics
 V. INSERTION-RELATED COMPLICATIONS. These are listed in Table 7.2. 
Arterial puncture by the initial small-gauge probing needle should 
be treated by uninterrupted local pressure for 15–20 minutes. The 
cannula should never be inserted into an artery. In case of inadver-
tent arterial insertion of a dialysis catheter, dialysis should be post-
poned and surgical opinion sought to avoid a major hematoma 
and tracheal compression. In the case of femoral insertions, retro-
peritoneal bleeding may be severe and life-threatening with either 
puncture of the artery or inadvertent puncture of the back wall of 
the vein. A large pneumothorax or hemothorax usually requires 
drainage using a surgically implanted chest tube. Perforation of the 
superior vena cava or cardiac chambers can be life-
 threatening. 
Diagnosis is suggested by unexplained chest pain, shortness of 
breath or hypotension soon after commencing dialysis. Surgical 
intervention is sometimes needed for correction. Infection-related 
complications can be minimized at time of catheter insertion by 
assuring adequate hand hygiene, use of sterile gown, mask, gloves 
and caps for the operator, and a large ( full body) sterile drape to 
cover the patient, and application of chlorhexidine skin antisepsis 
prior to the procedure (O’Grady, 2011).
VI. CARE AND USE OF VENOUS CATHETERS
A. Dressings. During catheter connect and disconnect proce-
dures, both dialysis staff and patient should wear surgical 
masks. A face shield should not be used without a surgical 
mask because the shield tends to focus the wearer’s breath 
directly on the exposed catheter hub. The lumen and catheter 
tips should never remain open to air. A cap or syringe should 
Immediate Complications
Arterial puncture (all)
Pneumothorax (IJ, SC)
Hemothorax (IJ, SC)
Arrhythmias (IJ, SC)
Air embolism (all IJ, SC .. F)
Perforation of cardiac chamber (IJ, SC)
Pericardial tamponade (IJ, SC)
Retroperitoneal hemorrhage (F)
Delayed Complications
Thrombosis (all)
Infection (all)
Central venous stenosis (SC .. IJ)
Arteriovenous fistula (all)
Injury to Adjacent Structures
Brachial plexus (IJ, SC)
Recurrent laryngeal nerve (IJ, SC)
IJ, internal jugular; SC, subclavian; F, femoral.
Complications of Central Venous Catheterization
7.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   129 09/10/14   1:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
130
always be placed on or in the catheter lumen while main-
taining a clean field under the catheter connectors. Catheter 
lumens must be kept sterile: Interdialytic infusions through 
the catheter are forbidden.
After each dialysis, catheter hubs or blood line connec-
tors should be soaked in antiseptic for 3–5 minutes, and then 
dried prior to separation. Chlorhexidine-based antiseptic 
solutions ( >0.5%) appear to give better results than povi-
done-iodine (Mimoz, 2007; Onder, 2009). After disconnecting 
each line from the catheter, the threads of the catheter con-
nector should be scrubbed with chlorhexidine (Table 7.3). The 
catheter should be covered with a sterile dry dressing. Non-
breathable or nonporous transparent film dressings should 
be avoided as they pose a greater threat of exit-site coloniza-
tion than dry dressings. The best type of dressing to use is 
still a matter of controversy. The CDC recommendations are 
to “use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semiper -
meable dressing to cover the catheter site” (O’Grady, 2011). 
The CDC has available resources including videos to show 
best practice techniques of making such catheter dressing 
changes (CDC, 2014).
B. Risk of air embolism on removal of dialysis catheters from the 
neck. After removal of a jugular venous catheter, lethal air 
embolism has been reported (Boer and Hené, 1999). Because 
of this nonnegligible risk, specific protocols should be in place 
for removal of venous catheters from the neck. The protocol 
recommended by Boer and Hené (1999) is as follows:
1. No heparin on day of planned removal. Protamine given if
heparin is already on board
2. Patient in head down position during catheter removal.
Patient instructed not to cough or inhale deeply during
removal
3. Air-occlusive dressing with generous amount of an inert
ointment to provide an instantaneous air seal
4. Patient observed for 30 minutes before leaving dialysis
facility
5. Air-occlusive dressing left in place for at least 24 hours
C. Catheter exchange over a guidewire (technique).  The reasons for 
catheter exchange over a guidewire (dysfunction, infec-
tion) are discussed in detail in Chapter 9. The technique for 
exchange of a catheter in the internal jugular vein is as follows: 
The chest wall and the old catheter are prepped and draped in 
a sterile fashion. The operators should wear two sterile gloves. 
Local anesthesia is infiltrated at the old exit site and around 
the cuff of the existing catheter. Both catheter ports are aspi-
rated to get rid of the heparin. Using a hemostat, blunt dissec-
tion is performed to free up the catheter cuff. At this point, 
a guidewire is introduced into the venous lumen of the cath-
eter and navigated into the inferior vena cava. The catheter is 
gently pulled back so that it is situated at the brachiocephalic 
vein. A contrast injection is performed through the atrial port 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   130 09/10/14   1:06 am
131Chapter 7 / Venous Catheter Access: The Basics
1. Surveillance and feedback using NHSN
Conduct monthly surveillance for BSIs and other dialysis events using CDC’s 
National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN). Calculate facility rates and 
compare with rates in other NHSN facilities. Actively share results with 
front-line clinical staff
2. Hand hygiene observations
Perform observations of hand hygiene opportunities monthly and share results 
with clinical staff
3. Catheter/vascular access care observations
Perform observations of vascular access care and catheter accessing 
quarterly. Assess staff adherence to aseptic technique when connecting 
and disconnecting catheters and during dressing changes. Share results 
with clinical staff
4. Staff education and competency
Train staff on infection control topics, including access care and aseptic 
technique. Perform competency evaluation for skills such as catheter care 
and accessing every 6–12 months and upon hire
5. Patient education/engagement
Provide standardized education to all patients on infection prevention topics 
including vascular access care, hand hygiene, risks related to catheter use, 
recognizing signs of infection, and instructions for access management 
when away from the dialysis unit
6. Catheter reduction
Incorporate efforts (e.g., through patient education, vascular access 
coordinator) to reduce catheters by identifying and addressing barriers to 
permanent vascular access placement and catheter removal
7. Chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis
Use an alcohol-based chlorhexidine (>0.5%) solution as the first-line skin 
antiseptic agent for central line insertion and during dressing changesa
8. Catheter hub disinfection
Scrub catheter hubs with an appropriate antiseptic after cap is removed and 
before accessing. Perform every time catheter is accessed or disconnectedb
9. Antimicrobial ointment
Apply antibiotic ointment or povidone-iodine ointment to catheter exit sites 
during dressing changec
aPovidone-iodine (preferably with alcohol) or 70% alcohol by itself is alternative for patients with 
chlorhexidine intolerance.
bIf closed needleless connector device is used, disinfect connector device as per manufacturer’s 
instructions.
cCDC recommends using povidone-iodine ointment or bacitracin/gramicidin/polymyxin B ointment 
at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after catheter insertion and at each hemodialysis session. 
Bacitracin/gramicidin/polymyxin B ointment is not currently available in the United States. Triple an-
tibiotic ointment (bacitracin/neomycin/polymyxin B) is available and might have a similar benefit but 
studies have not thoroughly evaluated its effect for prevention of bloodstream and exit-site infec-
tions. Other ointments that have been studied include single antibiotic ointments (e.g.,  mupirocin). 
However, concerns exist about development of antimicrobial resistance and also their ability to 
cover the spectrum of potential pathogens (e.g., gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria) that can 
cause bloodstream infections in dialysis patients. Another important consideration is that ingredi-
ents in antibiotic and povidone-iodine ointments may interact with the chemical composition of cer-
tain catheters. Therefore, before any product is applied to the catheter, first check with the catheter 
manufacturer to ensure that the selected ointment will not interact with the catheter material.
Reprinted from National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/dialysis/PDFs/Dialysis-Core-Interventions-5_10_13.pdf.
The Centers for Disease Control Core Interventions 
for Dialysis Bloodstream Infection (BSI) Prevention7.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   131 09/10/14   1:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
132
of the catheter to ascertain the presence of fibroepithelial 
sheath. If present, percutaneous balloon angioplasty should 
be considered and contrast injection repeated to evaluate the 
results of the sheath treatment. The old catheter should be 
removed while the wire is kept in place.
At this point, the operator (s) should remove the outer 
pair of gloves before handling  the new catheter. This maneu-
ver helps minimize the transfer of infectious organisms from 
the old catheter to the new catheter. The new catheter is then 
advanced over the wire and into the right atrium. The catheter 
function is assessed as described earlier.
D. Bathing and showering. The exit site should never be immersed 
in bath water. Showering is best avoided, but if the patient 
showers it should be done prior to coming to the dialysis 
unit, where a new dressing and antibacterial ointment will 
be promptly applied. Showering should be done only after the 
exit-site sinus tract has become established. A recent quality 
assurance study suggested that in selected patients, show-
ering in combination with a no-dressing technique for tun -
neled central venous catheters did not increase infection risk 
 (Lawrence, 2014). Immersive swimming, as in a chlorinated 
pool, is generally discouraged for fear of infection.
E. Catheter locks
1. Heparin. After each dialysis session, the dead space of each
lumen is filled with heparin through the catheter injec-
tion ports using 1,000–5,000 units/mL. Any lock solution
will leak out to the level of the most proximal side hole of
the catheter. Thus, use of higher heparin concentration
(5,000 vs. 1,000 units/mL) may result in significant systemic 
anticoagulation, but in one study, the higher heparin con -
centration was associated with lower need for tissue plami-
nogen activator use (Maya, 2010). The dead space of each
catheter lumen varies among manufacturers and length
of catheter. The required volume of heparin is usually
labeled on the catheter hub. It is important to record this
information on the patient’s chart so it is readily available
to the dialysis staff. Injection of a volume of heparin solu-
tion larger than necessary should be avoided as it results
in some degree of systemic anticoagulation that may be
hazardous to patients at risk for bleeding. Prior to each
dialysis, the heparin in each lumen is aspirated, the cath-
eter flushed with heparinized saline (100 units/mL), and
hemodialysis initiated.
2. Citrate 4%. Citrate can be used as an anticoagulant because
it chelates calcium, which is essential for clotting to occur.
A meta-analysis performed in 2014 concluded that citrate-
based lock solutions containing antibiotics or antiseptics
were better than their heparin-containing counterparts in
reducing the rate of central line–associated bloodstream
infection (CLABSI). Citrate alone was more effective than
heparin, but primarily when a high concentration (30%) was
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   132 09/10/14   1:06 am
133Chapter 7 / Venous Catheter Access: The Basics
used. At lower concentrations of citrate there seemed to be no 
advantage over heparin (Zhao, 2014). Citrate has been shown 
to leak out of catheter locks into the circulation fairly rap -
idly, quickly lowering its concentration to levels below those 
known to inhibit bacterial growth (Schilcher, 2014). In the 
United States, in the year 2000, use of very high concentrations 
of citrate in a dialysis catheter was associated with cardiac 
arrhythmia and patient death, presumably due to inadver -
tent injection of concentrated citrate into the left atrium, 
acutely lowering the ionized calcium level  (Polaschegg and 
Sodemann, 2003). It is prudent to use the lowest concentra-
tion (4% citrate), recognizing that efficacy of citrate at this 
concentration alone may be no better than that of heparin. 
Citrate use at any concentration is problematic in countries 
(such as the United States) where it is not conveniently avail-
able in small volumes to be used for a locking solution.
3. Other locks.  O ther lock solutions have contained heparin, 
citrate, ethanol, or EDTA plus one or more antibiotics or anti-
septics. For the moment, use of antibiotic-containing locks 
has not yet become mainstream, due in various proportions 
to added cost, practical issues relating to compounding, and 
fear of promoting growth of resistant organisms. A locking 
solution containing vancomycin and gentamicin was found 
to increase the prevalence of Staphylococcus and antibiotic-
resistant Enterobacter, for example (Dixon, 2012). For the 
moment, neither the CDC nor the US National Kidney Foun-
dation recommend the routine use of lock solutions con-
taining antibiotics (Camins, 2013), while the European Best 
Practices Group is somewhat equivocal (Vanholder, 2010).
Lock solution for prevention of infections in catheters 
is an active area of research. One goal is not only to sterilize 
the inside of the catheter but also to prevent the formation 
of biofilm. Locking solutions containing ethanol, citrate, or 
EDTA have a theoretical advantage of having some activ-
ity in affecting biofilm development. A solution containing 
glyceryl trinitrate, citrate, and ethanol has been reported to 
have some effects against not only common bacteria found 
in catheters but also biofilm (Rosenblatt, 2013). Other lock-
ing solutions have been developed and are in various stages 
of testing. A mixture of citrate, methylene blue, methylpara-
ben, and propylparaben (C-MB-P) was reported to reduce 
the rate of CLABSIs by a substantial amount (Maki, 2011). 
There is some enthusiasm about locks containing a com -
bination of taurolidine and citrate. It is possible that the 
use of taurolidine, which tends to function as a disinfectant 
and which inhibits the formation of biofilm, may not be as-
sociated with emergence of resistant bacteria (Liu, 2014).
F. Prophylactic antibiotics. S ystemic antibiotics are not given rou-
tinely prior to cuffed catheter insertion.
1. Exit-site ointment.  M upirocin ointment treatment of the 
catheter exit site to lower Staphylococcus  colonization has 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   133 09/10/14   1:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
134
been shown to reduce the catheter infection rate and to 
increase the catheter survival rate (McCann and Moore, 
2010; O’Grady, 2011), but is not widely used for fear of long-
term emergence of mupirocin-resistant organisms. The 
CDC recommends using exit-site ointments (Table 7.3) but 
is very concerned about the emergence of resistant organ -
isms. The European Renal Best Practices group, in a 2010 
commentary, recommends use of exit-site antibiotic oint -
ment only until the insertion site has healed 
 (Vanholder, 
2010). As an intermediate strategy, use of exit-site oint -
ments can be limited to those patients who evidence 
repeated episodes of infection. Prior to use of any ointment, 
one should check to make sure that the vehicle used to dis-
solve the ointment does not adversely react with the plas-
tics in the catheter material.
2. Nasal decolonization. In patients harboring Staphylococcus in
the nose, nasal decolonization has been shown to reduce
the rate of CLABSI (Abad, 2013), but the specter of mupi-
rocin resistance remains (Teo, 2011). This remains a more
attractive treatment option in selected patients than for
the unit as a whole, but nasal decolonization (of multidrug-
resistant S. aureus, for example) has been applied to entire
dialysis units with encouraging short-term results (Kang,
2012).
References and Suggested Readings
Abad CL, et al. Does the nose know? An update on MRSE decolonization strategies. 
Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2013;15:455–464.
Allon M. Dialysis catheter-related bacteremia: treatment and prophylaxis. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2004;44:779–791.
Beathard GA. Management of bacteremia associated with tunneled-cuffed hemodialy-
sis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1999;10:1045–1049.
Beaudoin FL, et al. Bedside ultrasonography detects significant femoral vessel overlap: 
implications for central venous cannulation. Can J Emerg Med. 2011;13:245–250.
Bevilacqua JL, et al. Comparison of trisodium citrate and heparin as catheter-locking 
solution in hemodialysis patients. J Bras Nefrol. 2011;33:68–73.
Boer WH, Hené RJ. Lethal air embolism following removal of a double lumen jugular 
catheter. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1999;14:1850–1852.
Camins BC. Preventions and treatment of hemodialysis-related bloodstream infec-
tions. Semin Dial. 2013;26:476–481.
Centers for Disease Control. Guidelines of the prevention of intravascular 
 catheter-related infections. 2011. http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/pdf/guidelines/  
bsi-guidelines-2011.pdf.
Centers for Disease Control. Training video and print resources for preventing blood-
stream and other infections in outpatient hemodialysis patients. Best practices for 
dialysis staff. 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/dialysis/prevention-tools/training-video  
.html.
Clark EG, Barsuk JH. Temporary hemodialysis catheters: recent advances. Kidney Int. 
2014. doi:10.1038/ki.2014.162.
Clase CM, et al. Thrombolysis for restoration of patency to hemodialysis central ve-
nous catheters: a systematic review. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2001;11(2):127–136.
Dixon JJ, Steele M, Makanjuola AD. Anti-microbial locks increase the prevalence of 
Staphylococcus aureus and antibiotic-resistant Enterobacter : observational retro-
spective cohort study. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:3575–3581.
Drew DA, Lok CE. Strategies for planning the optimal dialysis access for an individual 
patient. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2014;23:314–320.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   134 09/10/14   1:06 am
135Chapter 7 / Venous Catheter Access: The Basics
Dugué AE, et al; for the Cathedia Study Group. Vascular access sites for acute renal 
replacement in intensive care units. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7:70–77.
Frankel A. Temporary access and central venous catheters. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
2006;31:417–422.
Haymond J, et al. Efficacy of low-dose alteplase for treatment of hemodialysis catheter 
occlusions. J Vasc Access. 2005;6:76–82.
Hebert C, Robicsek A. Decolonization therapy in infection control. Curr Opin Infect 
Dis. 2010;23:340–345.
Hingwala J, Bhola C, Lok CE. Using tunneled femoral vein catheters for “urgent start” 
dialysis patients: a preliminary report. J Vasc Access. 2014;15(suppl 7):101–108.
Johnson DW , et al. A randomized controlled trial of topical exit site mupirocin ap-
plication in patients with tunnelled, cuffed haemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant. 2002;17:1802–1807.
Kang YC, et al. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus  nasal carriage among pa-
tients receiving hemodialysis in Taiwan: prevalence rate, molecular characteriza-
tion and de-colonization. BMC Infect Dis. 2012;12:284.
Lawrence JA, et al. Shower and no-dressing technique for tunneled central venous 
hemodialysis catheters: a quality improvement initiative. Nephrol Nurs J. 2014;  
41:67–72.
Lee T, Barker J, Allon M. Tunneled catheters in hemodialysis patients: reasons and 
subsequent outcomes. Am J Kidney Dis. 2005;46:501–508.
Little MA, Walshe JJ. A longitudinal study of the repeated use of alteplase as therapy for 
tunneled hemodialysis dysfunction. Am J Kidney Dis. 2002;39:86–91.
Liu H, et al. Preventing catheter-related bacteremia with taurolidine-citrate catheter 
locks. A systemic review and meta-analysis. Blood Purif. 2014;37:179–187.
Lok CE, et al. A patient-focused approach to thrombolytic use in the management of 
catheter malfunction. Semin Dial. 2006;19:381–390.
Maki DG, et al. A novel antimicrobial and antithrombotic lock solution for hemo-
dialysis catheters: A multi-center, controlled, randomized trial. Crit Care Med . 
2011;39:613–620.
Maya ID, Allon M. Outcomes of tunneled femoral hemodialysis catheters: comparison 
with internal jugular vein catheters. Kidney Int. 2005;68:2886–2889.
Maya ID, et al. Does the heparin lock concentration affect hemodialysis catheter pa-
tency? Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5:1458–1462.
McCann M, Moore ZE. Interventions for preventing infectious complications in hae-
modialysis patients with central venous catheters. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2010;(1):CD006894.
Mermel LA, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular catheter-related 
infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;32:1249–1272.
Mimoz O, et al. Chlorhexidine-based antiseptic solution vs alcohol-based 
 povidone-iodine for central venous catheter care. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:  
2066–2067.
Mokrzycki MH, et al. A randomized trial of minidose warfarin for the prevention of 
late malfunction in tunneled, cuffed hemodialysis catheters. Kidney Int. 2001;  
59:1935–1942.
Murea M, et al. Risk of catheter-related bloodstream infection in elderly patients on 
hemodialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;9:764–770.
O’Grady NP , et al. Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infec-
tions. Am J Infect Control 2011;39(suppl):S1–S34.
Oliver MJ, et al. Risk of bacteremia from temporary hemodialysis catheters by site of 
insertion and duration of use: a prospective study. Kidney Int. 2000;58:2543–2545.
Onder AM, et al. Chlorhexidine-based antiseptic solutions effectively reduce catheter-
related bacteremia. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009;224:1741–1747.
Patel PR, et al. Bloodstream infection rates in outpatient hemodialysis facilities 
 participating in a collaborative prevention effort: a quality improvement report. 
Am J Kidney Dis. 62:322–30, 2013.
Polaschegg HD, Sodemann K. Risks related to catheter locking solutions containing 
concentrated citrate. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2003;18:2688–2690.
Rabindranath KS, et al. Ultrasound use for the placement of haemodialysis catheters. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(11):CD005279.
Rosenblatt J, et al. Glyceryl trinitrate complements citrate and ethanol in a novel anti-
microbial catheter lock solution to eradicate biofilm organisms. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2013;57:3555–3560.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   135 09/10/14   1:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
136
Schilcher G, et al. Loss of antimicrobial effect of trisodium citrate due to ‘lock’ spillage 
from haemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014;29:914–919.
Silva TNV , et al. Approach to prophylactic measures for central venous catheter-
related infections in hemodialysis. A critical review. Hemodial Int. 2014;18:15–23.
Teo BW , et al. High prevalence of mupirocin-resistant staphylococci in a dialysis unit 
where mupirocin and chlorhexidine are routinely used for prevention of catheter-
related infections. J Med Microbiol. 2011;60(pt 6):865–867.
Vanholder RM, et al. Diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of haemodialysis catheter-
related bloodstreams infections (CRBSI): a position statement of European Renal 
Best Practice (ERBP). Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;3:234–246.
Zhao Y, et al. Citrate versus heparin lock for hemodialysis catheters: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2014;63:479–490.
Web References
American Society of Diagnostic and Interventional Nephrology. http://www.asdin  
.org/.
CDC guidelines for prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections. http://
www.cdc.gov/dialysis.
HDCN vascular access channel. http://www.hdcn.com/ch/access/.
KDOQI 2006 access guidelines. http://www.kidney.org/professionals/kdoqi/ guideline_
upHD_PD_VA/index.htm.
Vascular Access Society guidelines. http://www.vascularaccesssociety.com/guidelines 
.html.
YouTube link (11 min). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_0zhY0JMGCA&feature 
=youtu.be.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch007.indd   136 09/10/14   1:06 am