Once the AV access has been in use, the most important factors that 
limit its survival are stenosis, thrombosis, and infection. In general, 
complications occur more commonly in grafts than in AV fistulas.
 I. STENOSIS. Vascular access stenosis is a harbinger of thrombo-
sis, reduces access blood flow, and can lead to underdialysis. 
The most common cause of stenosis in AV grafts is neo intimal 
 hyperplasia, which usually occurs at or just distal to the graft–
vein anastomosis. In AV fistulas, the location and cause of ste-
nosis is more varied, with the juxta-anastomotic region being a 
frequent site. Common sites of stenosis in AV fistulas and grafts 
are shown in Figures 8.1 and 8.2. Because access patency is much 
worse after thrombectomy than after elective angioplasty, cur -
rent KDOQI guidelines recommend prospective monitoring and 
surveillance of AV fistulas and grafts for hemodynamically signif-
icant stenosis. Not all guidelines recommend routine monitoring, 
however, and there is controversy regarding the overall clinical 
benefit of maintaining an access surveillance program (Kumbar, 
2012; Paulson, 2012). Randomized controlled trials have not con-
sistently shown that surveillance improves outcomes in grafts; in 
fistulas, surveillance has been shown to reduce the rate of throm-
bosis, but may not prolong overall fistula life.
There are several strategies to detect stenosis prior to defini-
tive visualization of the access tract by Doppler ultrasound and, 
in the case of central vein stenosis, by venography. These early 
detection strategies depend on indirectly observing access pres-
sure, flow, or recirculation during dialysis. The optimum early 
detection strategy differs somewhat for fistulas versus grafts, and 
for forearm versus upper arm locations. The basic principles are 
these: (a) Recirculation of dialyzed blood across the access device 
immediately back through the dialysis circuit does not appear un-
til access flow decreases to a level near to or less than flow in the 
extracorporeal circuit. Thus, barring inadvertent needle reversal 
or improper needle placement, access recirculation will not be 
present until access flow falls to the range of 350–500 mL/min. At 
this range of flow, AV grafts are already at high risk for thrombosis, 
Arteriovenous Vascular 
Access Monitoring and 
Complications
Alexander Yevzlin, Anil K. Agarwal, 
Loay Salman, and Arif Asif
8
137
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   137 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
138
FIGURE 8.1 Common sites of stenosis in AV fistula. Locations are shown in  fistulae 
 created at wrist (A) and fistulae created at elbow (B). (From Turmel-Rodrigues 
L, et al. Treatment of stenosis and thrombosis in haemodialysis fistulas and grafts by 
 interventional radiology. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2000;15:2032–2036, with permission.)
1%
Wrist
6%
7%
18%
19%
49%
A
Elbow
6%
55%
22%
17%
B
FIGURE 8.2 Common sites of stenosis in AV graft. (Reproduced from Roy-Chaudhury P , et al. 
Vascular access in hemodialysis: issues, management, and emerging concepts. Cardiol 
Clin. 2005;23:249–273, with permission from Elsevier.)
6%
2%
8%
11%
4% 2%
47%
19%
Arterial anastomosis Midgraft
Venous anastomosis
Peripheral basilic
Axillary
Central basilic
<1 cm to venous
anastomosis
Subclavian
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   138 09/10/14   1:07 am
Chapter 8 / Arteriovenous Vascular Access Monitoring and Complications 139
so if true recirculation is detected in an AV graft, it is an urgent 
indication to image the graft and correct the stenosis. On the 
other hand, in AV fistulas, continued patency is likely even when 
recirculation is present ( flow in the 350–500-mL/min range). The 
benefits of screening AV fistulas for access recirculation are rela-
tively small in terms of preventing thrombosis, but screening for 
recirculation is useful to prevent underdialysis. Access stenosis 
that occurs between the usual sites of needle insertion will not 
cause recirculation, but may markedly reduce access flow to 
thrombosis-prone levels. Stenosis in this location should be sus-
pected when access flows are measured to be below the blood 
pump flow rate, but recirculation is not detectable. (b) Both grafts 
and fistulas commonly develop inflow stenosis, so strategies that 
detect 
 inflow stenosis will be useful for both types of AV access. 
(c) Outflow stenosis occurs much more frequently in grafts than 
in forearm fistulas where the degree of neointimal hyperplasia 
is less and where accessory outflow veins often compensate for 
 obstruction of a principal outflow channel. However, in upper arm 
fistulas, outflow stenosis is not uncommon. Hence, strategies that 
detect outflow stenosis will be more useful in monitoring function 
of AV grafts and of upper arm fistulas.
A. Physical examination of an AV access was discussed in some detail 
in Chapter 6. Table 8.1 shows the changes in physical findings 
with some common access complications. Physical examina-
tion can be quite useful in detecting isolated inflow or outflow 
access stenoses, but is less effective in detecting combined 
inflow and outflow lesions. The accuracy of physical examina-
tion is substantially higher if the persons doing the examina -
tion have received special training (Coentrão, 2012). The ESRD 
Network of Texas has sponsored some training documents and 
examples, which are available on the Web (Beathard, 2012).
B. Access surveillance using information obtained routinely during ev-
ery dialysis session.  Many dialysis machines have the option of 
measuring in vivo ionic dialysance. In all dialysis machines, 
the outflow venous pressure is monitored. Trending the re-
sults of these measurements over time can help detect access 
stenosis.
1. Trending ionic dialysance. The ionic dialysance measured via
conductivity includes any access recirculation component
if present; as the degree of access recirculation increases,
the in vivo ionic dialysance will decrease, assuming that
other features of the dialysis prescription (dialyzer K
0A, 
blood and dialysate flow rates, heparinization) are kept
constant. 
 Dialysis machines that measure ionic dialysance
typically integrate the clearances measured during each
treatment (K) to calculate a treatment Kt value (clearance ×
time) for that session. In one case series of six patients with 
AV fistulas, a sustained fall in Kt of 20% was associated with
access recirculation (Fontseré, 2011). Another approach is
to follow the ratio of ionic dialysance to blood flow. In one
report, a ratio of ≤0.5 had a high sensitivity and specificity
for access recirculation (Mohan, 2010).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   139 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
140
Parameter Normal Inflow Stenosis Outflow Stenosis
Coexisting Inflow and 
Outflow Stenosis Central Stenosis Clotted Access
Pulse Soft, easily 
compressible
Feeble pulse 
(hypopulsation)
Hyperpulsation (water-
hammer pulse, angry pulse)
Soft, easily 
compressible pulse
Variable Absent pulse
Thrill Continuous Discontinuous (in 
severe inflow stenosis 
the thrill can be 
absent)
Higher pitched, louder, then 
discontinuous (in severe 
outflow stenosis the thrill 
can be absent)
Discontinuous (usually 
absent)
Variable Absent thrill
Augmentation Test Normal Poor augmentation Good augmentation Poor augmentation Good augmentation
Arm Elevation Test
(fistula only)
Normal 
collapse
Normal or accentuated 
collapse
No collapse No collapse No collapse
Clinical Features No prolonged 
bleeding or 
difficulty in 
cannulation
Difficulty in 
cannulation and an 
increase in negative 
arterial pressure
Prolonged bleeding and 
high venous pressure
Edema of the arm 
and shoulder; breast, 
supraclavicular, neck 
and face swelling
Sometimes clots 
aspiration from 
the access
Access Flow Normal Decreased Decreased Decreased Variable Absent
Physical Findings with Various Forms of Access Dysfunction
8.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   140 09/10/14   1:07 am
Chapter 8 / Arteriovenous Vascular Access Monitoring and Complications 141
2. Trending venous outflow pressures.  Venous pressures are mea-
sured continuously during routine hemodialysis. Venous
pressures are a function of needle size, hematocrit (by its
effect on blood viscosity), and blood flow rate. All other
things being equal, a progressive rise in venous pressure
over time (weeks to months) is often due to access outflow 
stenosis (Zasuwa, 2010). Some large dialysis organization
data systems are able to track such pressures and trend
them over time, and one company in the United States
(Vasc-Alert, Lafayette, IN) sells software that allows easy
access to trended pressure data. One can also trend pre-
pump arterial pressure, which will increase (in a negative
direction) with worsening access inflow stenosis.
The sensitivity of pressure measurements during dial-
ysis to detect access stenosis can be increased by focusing 
on measurements taken at the beginning of dialysis with 
the blood flow rate set at a low value (200–225 mL/min), 
because at high blood flow rates, much of the resistance 
to flow is from the needle and not the vascular access. A 
baseline pressure value should be established when the 
access is first used. The threshold pressure that triggers 
further evaluation depends on the size of the needle, blood 
viscosity, and other factors; for 15G needles, a starting ve-
nous pressure threshold to use might be >115–120 mm Hg; 
for 16G needles, the threshold might be >150 mm Hg. Such 
threshold pressures must be exceeded on three or more 
treatments in succession to be significant.
C. Periodic measurements of access blood flow rate. To what extent a low 
access flow rate reflects stenosis and an increased risk of throm-
bosis depends on the type of access. Flow through a forearm AV 
fistula commonly averages 500–800 mL/min, and in grafts, flow 
is somewhat higher, about 1,000 mL/min. Flow in upper arm fis-
tulas or grafts may be considerably higher. AV fistulas may main-
tain patency at flows as low as 200 mL/min, whereas AV grafts 
begin to clot at access flows between 600 and 800 mL/min—
flows that often provide adequate dialysis but 
 offer few clinical 
premonitory signs that the access is at risk for thrombosis. The 
current KDOQI (2006) recommendations are to have the patient 
referred for access visualization if 
 access flow is <600 mL/min or 
if the access flow is <1,000 mL/min and has decreased by >25% 
over the preceding 4 months. While regular surveillance of vas-
cular access for stenosis has been shown to decrease thrombosis 
rates when compared with historical controls, recent prospec-
tive studies have not shown conclusively that detection of steno-
sis and correction with 
 angioplasty improves graft survival.
1. Direct measurement of access flow by saline dilution. This method for 
measuring access blood flow during hemodialysis treatments 
was pioneered by Krivitski (1995). The required equipment
is made by Transonic Systems, Inc. (Ithaca, NY) and consists
of a control box, two matched flow/dilution sensors,  a lap-
top computer, a data analysis software package, and a rolling
stand that can be easily moved between patients (Fig 8.3).The 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   141 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
142
setup shown in Fig. 8.3 is for measurement of access recircula-
tion; hence the needles are not reversed.  To measure access 
blood flow, one must deliberately cause access recirculation in 
the extracorporeal blood circuit by reversing the arterial and 
venous lines so that the dialyzer is fed from the downstream 
access needle (Fig 8.4). The degree of recirculation in such a 
system will depend on the ratio of the access blood flow rate 
to the rate of blood flow through the dialyzer. If the percent-
age recirculation and blood flow rate through the dialyzer are 
known, the access blood flow rate can then be calculated.
To measure the amount (percentage) of recirculation  
under needle-reversed conditions, a bolus of saline is injected 
into the blood leaving the dialyzer (Fig. 8.4). The amount of 
dilution in the outlet bloodline is measured by a downstream 
ultrasound sensor. The speed of sound through blood de-
pends on the concentration of proteins in the plasma; ac-
cordingly, the dilution effect of the saline bolus in the outlet 
bloodline can be quantified using this first sensor. Some of 
this saline-diluted blood will then traverse the vascular ac-
cess segment between the two needles and reappear at the 
dialyzer inlet. The proportion of the saline-diluted blood that 
reappears at the dialyzer inlet depends on the ratio of access 
blood flow to the blood flow through the dialyzer. A second 
ultrasound sensor on the bloodline leading to the dialyzer is 
then used to detect the proportion of saline-diluted blood 
that reappears at the dialyzer inlet (Fig. 8.4). In practice, an 
additional measurement of recirculation is made with the 
blood lines not reversed, as the presence of any recirculation 
under nonreversed conditions will affect the calculations.
FIGURE 8.3 Setup to measure access recirculation by saline dilution and ultrasound 
detection. To measure access blood flow, the access needles need to be reversed (not 
shown). See text for description of the setup and method. (Reproduced with permission 
from Transonic Systems, Inc., Ithaca, NY.)
Clamp
Saline
bag
Pump
Ultrasound dilution
sensorsAccess
device
Dialyzer
ComputerComputer
Transonic
Hemodialysis
monitor
HD01
A
V
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   142 09/10/14   1:07 am
Chapter 8 / Arteriovenous Vascular Access Monitoring and Complications 143
2. Alternative measures of access flow using temperature, sodium,  
or  hemoglobin changes.  The Fresenius Blood Temperature 
 Module has the ability to acutely change the temperature 
of the blood leaving the dialyzer, and the ionic conductivity 
module has the ability to acutely change the sodium concen-
tration of blood leaving the dialyzer. This is done by abruptly 
altering the dialysis solution temperature or conductivity, 
respectively. This permits measurement of access blood flow 
rate in a similar method to saline dilution. The lines are re-
versed, the dialyzer blood outlet temperature or conductiv-
ity is altered, and the amount of this perturbation that gets 
transmitted to the dialyzer inlet via forced recirculation is 
calculated. The intervention is repeated without reversing 
the bloodlines as a control. Hemoglobin dilution using an 
online hemoglobin monitor has been used to measure ac-
cess blood flow in an analogous fashion (Jiang, 2011; Roca-
Tey, 2012). Evidence suggests that these alternative methods 
are fairly accurate in measuring access blood flow, with the 
temperature method perhaps performing at a higher level 
(Badr, 2014). The advantage of using temperature or ionic di-
alysance is that the need for a separate ultrasound dilution 
sensor and laptop computer is no longer required.
D. Doppler ultrasonography to measure access flow. Doppler ultrasono-
graphy, though usually used to detect stenotic lesions directly, 
can also be used to measure the rate of flow through a vascular 
FIGURE 8.4 Measurement of access flow by saline dilution showing blood line reversal 
and position of blood line sensors. See text for details of the method. (Reproduced with 
permission from Transonic Systems, Inc., Ithaca, NY.)
Arterial line
Venous line
Saline
infusion
Flow
dilution
sensors
Mixing
areaQa Qa
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   143 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
144
access. A variety of machines and several different flow velocity 
algorithms have been used. There is systematic underestima -
tion or overestimation of flow by some machines. Flow mea-
surement by Doppler depends on an accurate measurement of 
both velocity and vessel diameter. This may be difficult when 
flow is turbulent in an access and when the vessel diameter is 
not uniform. Because of these confounders, flow is better mea-
sured at the brachial artery, where the vessel is a smooth cylin-
der of blood and flow is nonturbulent. Almost all of the flow in 
the brachial artery (apart from about 60–80 mL/min nutrient 
flow) passes through the vascular access, and brachial artery 
flow correlates very well with access flow rate.
E. Intra-access pressure (PIA) and access flow. Flow, pressure, and re-
sistance are mathematically related. In an AV graft, the P IA is 
usually <50% of MAP (mean arterial pressure). Most of this 
pressure drop occurs at the arterial anastomosis, unless there 
is intragraft stenosis. When outflow stenosis develops (e.g., due 
to neointimal hyperplasia at or downstream from the graft–
vein anastomosis), P
IA rises and flow decreases. When PIA rises 
above 50% of the MAP (PIA/MAP >0.50), graft flow commonly 
has decreased into the thrombosis-prone range of 600–800 
mL/min, and the presence of stenosis is likely. Details of how 
to compute this ratio based on an equivalent P
IA  (EQPIA =  PIA 
adjusted for the relative heights of the access measuring point 
and pressure transducer) are given in Table 8.2.
 In AV fistulas, 
blood entering the venous system returns via multiple collat -
eral veins. As a consequence, P IA in an AV fistula, which is on 
average lower than in an AV graft, may not increase with outlet 
stenosis and is therefore less valuable as a surveillance tool. 
If a stenosis develops in the body of an AV graft between 
the areas used for arterial and venous limb cannulation, P
IA at 
the venous needle remains normal or can even decrease, despite 
increasing stenosis. Stenosis at the arterial anastomosis of both 
Example:
1. Measure MAP: Assume that BP is 190/100. MAP is diastolic plus one-third of 
pulse pressure, or 130 mm Hg.
2.
 Measure static intra-access pressure:
a.
With the blood pump off and the blood line upstream to the venous drip 
chamber clamped, the venous drip chamber pressure is 60 mm Hg.
b.
Compute offset using equation: offset (mm Hg) = −1.6 + 0.74 × H (cm), 
where H is the height between the access and middle of the drip chamber. 
Assume H is 35 cm. Then offset = −1.6 + 25.9 = 24.3 mm Hg.
c.
Add offset to compute EQPIA:EQPIA = 60 + 24.3 = 84.3 mm Hg.
d. Compute the EQPIA/MAP ratio. In this case, 84/130 = 0.65, which is >0.5. 
This access is at risk for stenosis.
EQPIA, equivalent intra-access pressure; MAP , mean arterial pressure; BP , blood pressure.
Source: Besarab A, et al. Simplified measurement of intra-access pressure. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
1998;9:284–289
Measuring the EQPIA/MAP Ratio
8.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   144 09/10/14   1:07 am
Chapter 8 / Arteriovenous Vascular Access Monitoring and Complications 145
grafts and fistulas causes PIA to decrease, and a widely patent arte-
rial anastomosis causes high basal PIA in the absence of stenosis.
F. Access recirculation. Both urea-based and non–urea-based (e.g., 
ultrasound dilution) techniques have been used to detect 
 recirculation. The urea-based methods have been described in 
Chapter 3. The ultrasound dilution technique described earlier 
can be used to measure recirculation. In this case, the blood 
lines are not reversed. If dialyzer outlet blood is recirculating 
through the access and diluting the dialyzer inlet, the bolus 
of saline injected into the outlet blood line will be detected by 
the sensor located on the inlet blood line soon after injection. 
Measurement of access recirculation by thermal dilution us -
ing a blood temperature module yields results similar to those 
obtained by the ultrasound dilution technique. Recirculation 
exceeding 10% using the recommended two-needle urea-based 
method, 5% using the ultrasound dilution method, or 15% using 
the thermal dilution method should prompt investigation.
II. IMAGING THE VASCULAR ACCESS
A. Doppler ultrasonography.  This noninvasive technique allows
direct imaging of the flow pattern in AV grafts and fistulas. 
It has been useful for detecting stenoses and for mapping 
aneurysms. Doppler flow measurements are prohibitively 
expensive for routine assessment. Their chief role is in the 
evaluation of flow and anatomy in accesses that have been 
screened by other techniques.
B. Access angiography.  Most centers refer patients with a high 
probability of stenosis as determined by low-cost methods 
directly for angiography and balloon angioplasty, bypassing 
Doppler altogether. One should use the lowest possible dose of 
nonosmotic contrast agent, diluted, if possible. Angiography 
can be used for limited evaluation of the arterial tree as well.
C. Magnetic resonance angiography  (MRA). The 2007 European Best 
Practice guidelines recommend use of MRA to image the vas-
cular access when there is the need to see both the venous and 
the arterial parts of the upper extremity circulation (Tordoir, 
2007). The European guidelines cite a number of studies where 
MRA has been used successfully for access visualization. The 
incidence of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis with gadolinium is 
reduced with the newer contrast agents (Coca and Perazella, 
2011), but the cumulative risk of multiple MRA procedures in 
dialysis patients has not been well quantified.
III. PERCUTANEOUS INTERVENTION AFTER ACCESS STENOSIS HA S BEEN
 IDENTIFIED. Once a stenosis >50% is detected, percutaneous trans-
luminal catheter angioplasty or surgical revision of the lesion
should be performed if one or more of the following are present:
(a) abnormal physical examination, (b) previous history of throm-
bosis, (c) decreasing access flow, and (d) elevated or increasing
measured static intra-access pressures (normalized to MAP). The
expertise at each institution should determine which procedure
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   145 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
146
is to be performed. If repeated angioplasties have been required 
within a short period for the same lesion, surgical revision should 
be considered.
In most institutions, vascular access–related procedures are 
performed by surgeons and interventionalists. Numerous centers 
in the United States now offer the nephrologist formal training in 
the techniques of percutaneous angioplasty and thrombectomy. 
Because nephrologists have a different clinical perspective of pa-
tients and their access-related problems, their direct involvement 
in interventional procedures may help minimize delays, decrease 
hospitalizations and costs, and increase overall patient satisfaction.
A. T reatment of early AV fistula dysfunction.   A significant number (10%–
35%) of AV fistulas do not adequately develop and fail to sustain 
dialysis therapy. Vascular stenosis or the presence of a signifi-
cant accessory vein (an accessory vein is described as a side 
branch coming off the main venous channel that comprised 
the fistula) alone or in combination are the main culprits. Of 
the two problems (stenosis and accessory veins), stenosis is 
present in over 70% of the cases of fistula nonmaturation. In 
most  cases, the stenosis will be found close to the anastomosis 
(a juxta-anastomotic lesion). Percutaneous  balloon angioplasty 
can successfully treat this lesion and salvage a great majority of 
otherwise failed fistulae. In cases of nonmaturation due to the 
presence of accessory veins, an obliteration procedure using 
one of the three techniques  (percutaneous ligation, venous cut-
down, or coil insertion) can be used to salvage the failing fistula.
B. Flow measurements immediately after access revision.  Sometimes 
radiographic correction of an apparent stenosis does not re-
sult in improvement in the access blood flow rate. At other 
times, access blood flow initially increases, but then falls back 
to pretreatment levels within a day or two of the procedure. 
Measurement of access flow immediately after a revision or 
angioplasty is helpful in terms of determining the likelihood 
that the access will remain open for a clinically useful period.
C. Endovascular stents and vascular stenosis.  Endovascular stents 
have emerged as an important strategy to treat vascular 
 access stenosis. Interventionalists use stents primarily to 
treat stenoses associated with AV grafts located at or just dis-
tal to the graft–vein anastomosis. Stents are also used in the 
management of pseudoaneurysms (see later). A stent graft is 
a metal stent with PTFE covering its internal surface, external 
surface, or both. Recently, a large multicenter, randomized, 
controlled trial (Haskal, 2010) found better patency rates for 
stent graft versus simple angioplasty for treatment of stenosis 
at the graft–vein anastomosis. Primary patency at 6 months 
for lesions treated with a stent graft (51%) was superior to that 
for stenoses treated by angioplasty alone (23%; P  < 0.001).
It is not uncommon for the dialysis access to be affected 
by several coexisting stenoses. The benefits of fixing one pri-
mary target lesion might be less important in the presence 
of such coexisting stenoses that might require placement of 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   146 09/10/14   1:07 am
Chapter 8 / Arteriovenous Vascular Access Monitoring and Complications 147
additional stent grafts. The cost increment when using an 
endovascular stent must be balanced against the cost of an 
angioplasty alone or the alternative of primary surgical repair.
I V. THROMBOSIS. Thrombosis is the most common complication of
arteriovenous access and accounts for 80%–85% of access loss.
The primary patency rate of AV grafts is around 40%–50% at 1
year and 25% at 2 years. Causes of thrombosis include stasis of
flow, vascular endothelial injury, and altered blood coagulability,
but other contributing factors include arterial stenosis, fistula
compression, hematoma formation from cannulation injury, hy -
povolemia, hypotension, and hypercoagulable states. On physical 
examination, there is absence of thrill or bruit (Table 8.1). Both
endovascular techniques (mechanical and/or pharmacologic)
and surgical techniques are effective in declotting the access. In
case of recurrent thrombosis, it is important to investigate for
causes of thrombosis other than stenosis.
A. Predisposing factors.  An increasingly recognized number of
 dialysis patients have subtle accentuations of hemostasis, 
 including high fibrinogen levels, reduced levels of protein S or 
C, factor V Leiden mutation, lupus anticoagulant, or elevated 
hematocrit levels due to erythropoietin therapy. Whether or 
not these conditions are associated with increased access 
thrombosis is controversial. Use of warfarin is problematic, 
because in patients with protein S or C deficiency, or even in 
the absence of these, warfarin may precipitate calciphylaxis 
with skin necrosis. Warfarin use is difficult to monitor in 
 patients with lupus anticoagulant, as the prothrombin time is 
an unreliable measure of anticoagulation.
B. Prevention. Anticoagulants and antiplatelet drugs may help 
prevent AV access thrombosis, but most studies published 
thus far do not support their routine use. Separate random-
ized clinical trials of both low-dose warfarin (with a target 
international normalized ratio 1.4–1.9) and clopidogrel plus 
aspirin versus placebo in patients with PTFE grafts failed to 
demonstrate a reduction in thrombotic events or prolonga -
tion of graft survival. Both studies showed clinically and sta-
tistically significant bleeding complications in the treated 
patients. However, another randomized trial found a decrease 
in the relative risk of thrombosis in patients with new PTFE 
grafts treated with dipyridamole. A meta-analysis studying the 
usefulness of antiplatelet therapy to prevent vascular access 
failure that analyzed 21 eligible trials concluded that anti -
platelet agents were useful to protect fistulas from thrombosis 
or loss of patency, but had little or no effect on the patency of 
AV grafts (Palmer, 2013).
C. Treatment
1. In AV fistulas.  Thrombosis of the fistula occurs  either soon
after its construction or as a late event.  Patients should be
taught to monitor their fistula daily, when possible. Early
thrombosis results from technical factors and almost always 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   147 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
148
requires surgical or percutaneous intervention, although 
there may be inadvertent compression while sleeping. Poor 
flow precedes late thrombosis in most cases, but hypoten-
sion or hypercoagulability may also precipitate thrombo -
sis in the absence of downward flow trends. Treatment of 
thrombosis can be difficult but should be performed using 
either percutaneous methods or surgical thrombectomy, 
depending on the expertise of each institution. Techniques 
aiming to remove the bulk of the thrombus have been re-
ported to have a higher success rate (Palmer, 2006).
2. In AV grafts.  Thrombosis can be managed by surgical
thrombectomy or by mechanical or pharmacomechani -
cal thrombolysis, again depending on the expertise of
the medical center. Treatment should be performed ur -
gently to avoid the need for temporary access. The en-
tire access circuit should be thoroughly evaluated during
the procedure by imaging. Residual stenosis exceeding
85% should be retreated by balloon angioplasty or surgi-
cal revision. The role of antiplatelet drugs or warfarin in
patients with recurrent thrombosis is unknown. Patients
who clot with intra-access flows > 1,000 mL/min should
be educated to avoid external access compression, evalu-
ated for 
 hypercoagulability, and/or examined for presence 
of  delayed hypotension after dialysis. Routine monitoring
and surveillance of the graft should resume shortly after
successful treatment. For patients with failed thrombec -
tomy and thrombolysis, surgical efforts should be focused
on creating a secondary fistula from the venous drainage of 
the graft. Such fistulas are possible because of the 
 venous
enlargement and thickening caused by the previous graft,
and have the advantage of being usable much sooner after 
creation of the fistula. KDOQI guidelines recommend that
every patient should be evaluated for a secondary fistula
after each episode of graft failure.
 V. ISCHEMIA IN A LIMB BEARING AN AV ACCESS.  Dialysis access–  
associated hand ischemia, commonly known as “steal syndrome, ” 
complicates 1%–20% of accesses and can lead to pain, loss of 
function, and, rarely, the loss of limb. One mechanism of hand 
ischemia is thought to be “arterial steal” from retrograde flow in 
the distal artery toward the access but the presence of arterial 
stenosis or distal arteriopathy involving small vessels often are 
contributory. Risk factors include upper arm access, peripheral 
arterial disease, and diabetes.
A. Detection. Patients with an established fistula should be as-
sessed monthly by interval history and physical examination. 
Clinically, there is pain, coldness, and paresthesias of distal 
extremity, especially during dialysis, which can progress to 
cyanosis, pulselessness, ischemic ulcers, and dry gangrene over 
days to weeks to months. The onset can be immediately after 
access creation or insidiously over days to weeks. Examination 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   148 09/10/14   1:07 am
Chapter 8 / Arteriovenous Vascular Access Monitoring and Complications 149
requires comparison with the temperature, pulse, and function 
of the opposite hand.
Digital pressures, transcutaneous oxygen measurements, 
and arteriography (with access open and closed) are helpful 
in evaluation, but are not necessarily specific. The diagnosis 
is based on the clinical symptoms and signs as well as on the 
demonstration of poor circulation in the extremity. Differential 
diagnosis involves carpal tunnel syndrome, peripheral vascular 
disease, neuropathy, nerve trauma, or ischemic monomelic neu-
ropathy due to the loss of blood supply to nerves. 
B. Management. Mild ischemia manifested by coldness or pares-
thesias but without sensory or motor loss can be managed 
expectantly. Pain of the hand on exercise due to a “steal”  effect 
(or in extreme instances, pain at rest) or the appearance of 
nonhealing ulcers usually requires surgical intervention.  Loss 
of motor function of hand is a surgical emergency and surgical 
evaluation for banding or ligation of the access should be done 
immediately.
1. DRIL procedure.  With the usual radiocephalic side-to-side 
fistula, the radial artery anastomosis regularly steals blood 
flow from the ulnar artery system. Converting the side-
of-artery to an end-of-artery anastomosis can sometimes 
be used to treat ischemia due to steal. Severe cases of 
steal syndrome require ligation of the AV fistula, but dis-
tal  revascularization interval ligation (DRIL) can be used 
to treat ischemia while preserving fistula patency. The 
DRIL technique requires ligation of the artery immediately 
distal to the origin of the AV fistula and construction of a 
reversed saphenous vein bypass from the artery proximal 
to the origin of the fistula to the artery distal to the site 
of ligation. One report suggests that success of the DRIL 
procedure is higher if the origin of the bypass graft is well 
upstream to the site of the fistula anastomosis to avoid a 
region of low pressure in the artery upstream to the fistula 
anastomotic site (Kopriva, 2014).
2. Banding. Steal due to high access flow can be treated by 
banding, and this can be done using a minimally invasive 
procedure (Miller, 2010).
3. Other procedures. Treatment of hand edema after placement 
of an AV fistula consists of converting the anastomosis from 
a side-of-vein to an end-of-vein opening or by selectively 
tying off affected veins. A small increase in circumference 
(2–3 cm) of the arm bearing the access is common after 
placement of an AV access, but larger increases indicate 
venous hypertension usually due to stenosis of the central 
veins.
 VI. PSEUDOANEURYSM. Trauma to AV access from repeated cannula -
tion in the same area can cause damage to all layers of native vein 
or graft material. Large aneurysms can prevent adequate needle 
placement and limit potential puncture sites. These dilatations 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   149 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
150
can further expand, especially if there is a downstream stenosis 
causing increased intra-access pressure. Aneurysms and pseudo-
aneurysm are prone to get infected or can contribute to throm-
bosis. A major concern is rupture that can lead to exsanguination 
and fatal hemorrhage. The signs of impending rupture include 
thin and shiny overlying skin, prolonged leaking or ulceration 
over the surface, and rapid enlargement of aneurysm. Early inter-
vention is essential to prevent such complications.
A. AV fistula. Pseudoaneurysm is much more common than a true 
aneurysm. It results from failure to properly rotate access punc-
ture sites, from inadequate hemostasis and from extravasation 
of blood following dialysis needle removal. Most pseudoaneu-
rysms and true aneurysms are treated by observation only and 
by avoiding puncture of the fistula in the area of the aneurysm 
site, though sometimes surgical correction is required.
B. AV graft. In AV grafts, there is no true expansion of the vessel 
lumen; the wall of the “aneurysm, ” really a pseudoaneurysm, 
is formed by a layer of external soft tissue. These should be 
treated by resection and insertion of an interposition graft 
if they are rapidly expanding, >12 mm in diameter, and/or 
threatening the viability  of the overlying skin. The AV graft 
should be surgically revised if pseudoaneurysm formation 
limits the number of puncture sites available or is causing per-
sistent symptoms such as pain and throbbing.
C. Use of stents. Stents have been used for the percutaneous treat-
ment of pseudoaneurysms (Fotiadis, 2014). Although these 
devices result in immediate exclusion of pseudoaneurysm, re-
currence of the pseudoaneurysm and stent-graft damage as a 
result of repeated cannulation remain major problems. Broken 
stent struts can sometimes protrude through the skin, pos-
ing a threat of injury to staff who place the patient on dialysis. 
Exclusion of a pseudoaneurysm using a stent graft represents 
an “off-label” use of the device. The risk of stent-graft infection 
is another consideration. Safety of cannulation through stent 
grafts used to treat pseudoaneurysm has not been conclusively 
established in a prospective manner. Similarly, the role of surgi-
cal intervention in the treatment of pseudoaneurysms has not 
been directly compared with  results using stent grafts. Stent 
grafts do provide rescue therapy in the event of angioplasty-
induced vascular rupture. Complete rupture is one situation in 
which a stent graft is clearly indicated as this stabilizes the ac-
cess and avoids the need for an emergency surgical procedure.
 VII. INFECTIONS. Infection of the access is usually manifested as ery-
thema, pain, or purulent exudate from needle sites. Often, the first 
sign is fever with no other obvious source and positive blood cul-
tures. The access should not be used if actively infected. Cultures
(of blood and of any wound if present) should be taken and an-
tibiotic therapy initiated. The possibility of endocarditis or other
sources of infection should be investigated, depending on the
pathogen found, and especially if cultures fail to turn negative after 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   150 09/10/14   1:07 am
Chapter 8 / Arteriovenous Vascular Access Monitoring and Complications 151
antibiotic treatment. Ultrasound evaluation of the tissues around 
the access is sometimes useful in revealing localized fluid accumu-
lation. An infected access usually requires surgical intervention for 
debridement or excision.
A. AV fistula. Infections are rare and usually caused by staphylo-
cocci; they should be treated in the same manner as subacute 
endocarditis with 6 weeks of antibiotics. Diagnosis is based 
on local signs of inflammation. Prompt therapy with anti -
staphylococcal antimicrobials, after local and blood cultures 
have been obtained, is often curative. Septic embolus during 
therapy warrants removal of the fistula.
B. AV graft. Graft infection occurs eventually in 5%–20% of grafts 
placed, and thigh grafts have an even higher rate of infection. 
Prophylactic antimicrobials should be used when patients 
with vascular grafts undergo procedures capable of inducing 
bacteremia, such as dental extraction or genitourinary ma -
nipulation. Most graft infections are staphylococcal. Gram-
negative organisms such as Escherichia coli  may be cultured, 
especially from thigh grafts (Harish and Allon, 2011). Initial 
antibiotic treatment should include drugs active against 
gram-negative and gram-positive organisms as well as against 
Enterococcus. Local infection of a graft can be treated with an-
tibiotics (based on culture results) and by incision/resection 
of the infected portion. Extensive infection requires complete 
excision/removal.
Septicemia may occur without local signs. In such cases, 
a technetium-labeled leukocyte scan may help reveal a graft 
infection, but care must be taken to remove any blood-soaked 
dressings prior to scanning, as they may lead to a falsely posi-
tive result. Hemorrhage may occur due to rupture of an in-
fected graft. A graft that becomes 
 infected within 30 days of 
placement probably should be removed.
1. Silent infection in a thrombosed AV graft.  Old thrombosed grafts
may become infected with few local signs, suggesting that
perhaps such grafts should be electively removed soon
 after they are abandoned. This can be a cause of elevated
serum C-reactive protein levels and ESA resistance. How-
ever, because surgical removal often requires extensive tis-
sue dissection, this problem needs further study before a
blanket recommendation can be made.
 VIII. CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE.  Congestive heart failure is unusual
with a forearm access but may occur in patients with upper arm
or femoral fistulas, particularly if there is coexistent heart dis-
ease. Although long-term cardiac function is thought to be gener-
ally unaffected by the presence of an AV access, closure of access 
has been associated with reduction of left ventricular mass and
improvement in left ventricular eccentric and concentric hyper -
trophy (Movilli, 2010). Increased pulmonary arterial flow (which
can be associated with a high-flow access) can aggravate pulmo-
nary hypertension.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   151 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
152
Some AV accesses can continue to increase their blood flow. 
There is a higher risk of high output heart failure when the flow ex-
ceeds 20% of the cardiac output. Upper arm access and  access flow 
>2,000 mL/min increase such risk (Stern and  Klemmer, 2011). In 
these cases, banding of access to reduce  access flow (Miller, 2010) 
should be considered. Despite theoretical benefits, surgical nar -
rowing or banding should be considered primarily when cardiac 
studies have shown marked changes in cardiac output following 
transient occlusion of the access. In patients with unexplained high 
cardiac output states, one should first consider and correct any 
anemia that may be present. Use of vasodilators such as minoxi-
dil or hydralazine without concomitant beta-blockade is another 
common, correctable cause of high cardiac output. 
 Finally, volume 
overload is common in dialysis patients and must be  considered 
in individuals presenting with signs and symptoms of heart failure.
IX. COMPLICATION OF PERCUTANEOUS INTERVENTIONS. The most frequent
procedure-related complication seen in association with angio -
plasty is vessel rupture as evidenced by contrast extravasation and/
or bleeding. This complication is relatively infrequent (2%), and can 
range from clinically insignificant to severe. 
 Subclinical extravasa-
tion of contrast at the site of angioplasty is not usually a cause for
much concern. In mild cases of vessel rupture, there may be hema-
toma, but the patient is asymptomatic. Larger hematomas may af-
fect access flow, and very large hematomas can result from total or 
near total rupture of the access vein. In such instances, insertion of
an endovascular stent can be very helpful to stem the bleeding.
Another complication that is associated with percutaneous 
angioplasty is pulmonary embolism, especially during thrombec-
tomy. Clinically significant pulmonary embolism is infrequent. 
Distal embolization of thrombus into an artery can occur during 
thrombectomy, and in such cases, the thrombus should be imme-
diately removed using an embolectomy catheter.
 X. CLINICAL OUTCOME GOALS AND MONITORING
A. Establishment of a vascular access team and continuous quality improve-
ment (CQI). Establishment of a vascular access team that includes 
nephrologists, surgeons, interventionists, a vascular access co-
ordinator, and dialysis personnel is essential to 
 ensure good vas-
cular access outcomes. Ideally, the vascular access team should 
meet regularly to review data and provide a measurement of 
performance based on established KDOQI guidelines. Data col-
lected should include number and type of vascular accesses, in-
fection and thrombosis rates, number and type of interventions 
performed, and time to access failure. Centers should monitor 
outcome results after thrombosis and set minimum goals for 
both immediate and long-term patency. Trends should be ana-
lyzed and feedback provided to all members of the team. This 
approach fosters preemptive 
 action and salvage rather than re-
placement of AV accesses, and helps ensure a minimal need for 
venous catheter access, and delivery of an adequate dialysis dose.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   152 09/10/14   1:07 am
Chapter 8 / Arteriovenous Vascular Access Monitoring and Complications 153
References and Suggested Readings
Agarwal AK, Asif A. Interventional Nephrology. Washington, DC: American Society of 
Nephrology, NephSAP; 2009.
Asif A, et al., eds. Textbook of Interventional Nephrology. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2012.
Ayus AC, Sheikh-Hamad D. Silent infections in clotted hemodialysis access grafts. J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 1998;9:1314–1317.
Badr B, et al. Transonic, thermodilution, or ionic dialysance to manage vascular access: 
which method is best? Hemodial Int. 2014;18:127–135.
Beathard GD. A practicioner’s resource guide to physical examination of the vascular 
access. ESRD Network of Texas; 2012. http://www.esrdnet15.org/QI/C5D.pdf.
Besarab A, et al. Simplified measurement of intra-access pressure. ASAIO 
J. 1996;42:M682–M687.
Besarab A, et al. The utility of intra-access monitoring in detecting and correcting 
venous outlet stenoses prior to thrombosis. Kidney Int. 1995;47:1364–1373.
Besarab A, Sherman R. The relationship of recirculation to access blood flow. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 1997;29:223–229.
Campos RP , et al. Stenosis in hemodialysis arteriovenous fistula: evaluation and treat-
ment. Hemodial Int. 2006;10:152–161.
Chemla ES, et al. Complex bypasses and fistulas for difficult hemodialysis access: a 
prospective, single-center experience. Semin Dial. 2006;19:246–250.
Chin AI, et al. Intra-access blood flow in patients with newly created upper-
arm  arteriovenous native fistulas for hemodialysis access. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2004;44:850–858.
Coca SG, Perazella MA. Use of iodinated and gadolinium-containing contrast 
media. In: Daugirdas JT, ed. Handbook of Chronic Kidney Disease Management . 
 Philadelphia, PA: Kluwer; 2011:363–375.
Coentrão L, Faria B, Pestana M. Physical examination of dysfunctional arteriovenous 
fistulae by non-interventionalists: a skill worth teaching. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2012;27:1993–1996.
Crowther MA, et al. Low-intensity warfarin is ineffective for prevention of PTFE 
graft failure in patients on hemodialysis: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Soc 
Nephrol. 2002;13(9):2331–2337.
Depner TA, Krivitsky NM, MacGibbon D. Hemodialysis access recirculation measured 
by ultrasound dilution. ASAIO J. 1995;41:M749–M753.
Fontseré N, et al. Practical utility of on-line clearance and blood temperature moni-
tors as noninvasive techniques to measure hemodialysis blood access flow. Blood 
Purif. 2011;31:1–8.
Fotiadis N, et al. Endovascular repair of symptomatic hemodialysis access graft pseu-
doaneurysms. J Vasc Access. 2014;15:5–11.
Gradzki R, et al. Use of ACE inhibitors is associated with prolonged survival of arterio-
venous grafts. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001;38:1240–1244.
Harish A, Allon M. Arteriovenous graft infection: a comparison of thigh and upper 
extremity grafts. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:1739–1743.
Haskal ZJ, et al. Stent graft versus balloon angioplasty for failing dialysis access grafts. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;362:494–503.
Huijbregts HJ, Blankestijn PJ. Dialysis access—guidelines for current practice. Eur J 
Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2006;31:284–287.
Jiang SH, et al. Validation of the measurement of haemodialysis access flow using a 
haemoglobin dilution test. Blood Purif. 2011;32:48–52.
Kaufman JS, et al. Randomized controlled trial of clopidogrel plus aspirin to prevent 
hemodialysis access graft thrombosis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003;14:2313–2321.
Kopriva D, McCarville DJ, Jacob SM. Distal revascularization and interval liga-
tion (DRIL) procedure requires a long bypass for optimal inflow. Can J Surg. 
2014;57:112–115.
Krivitski NM. Theory and validation of access flow measurement by dilution technique 
during hemodialysis. Kidney Int. 1995;48:244–250.
Kumbar L, Karim J, Besarab A. Surveillance and monitoring of dialysis access. Int J 
Nephrol. 2012;2012:649735.
Lok CE, et al. Reducing vascular access morbidity: a comparative trial of two vascular 
access monitoring strategies. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2003;18:1174–1180.
Maya ID, et al. Vascular access stenosis: comparison of arteriovenous grafts and fistu-
las. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004;44:859–865.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   153 09/10/14   1:07 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
154
Miller GA, et al. The MILLER banding procedure is an effective method for treating 
dialysis-associated steal syndrome. Kidney Int. 2010;77:359–366.
Mohan S, et al. Effective ionic dialysance/blood flow rate ratio: an indicator of access 
recirculation in arteriovenous fistulae. ASAIO J. 2010;56:427–433.
Movilli E, et al. Long-term effects of arteriovenous fistula closure on echocardiographic 
functional and structural findings in hemodialysis patients: a prospective study. 
Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;55:682–689.
National Kidney Foundation. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for vascular access: 
update 2006. Am J Kidney Dis. 2006;48(suppl 1):S188–S306.
Oakes DD, et al. Surgical salvage of failed radiocephalic arteriovenous fistulas: tech-
niques and results in 29 patients. Kidney Int. 1998;53:480–487.
Ohira S, Kon T, Imura T. Evaluation of primary failure in native AV-fistulae (early fistula 
failure). Hemodial Int. 2006;10:173–179.
Ortega T, et al. The timely construction of arteriovenous fistulas: a key to reducing 
morbidity and mortality and to improving cost management. Nephrol Dial Trans-
plant. 2005;20:598–603.
Palmer RM, et al. Is surgical thrombectomy to salvage failed autogenous arteriovenous 
fistulae worthwhile? Am Surg. 2006;72:1231–1233.
Palmer SC, et al. Antiplatelet therapy to prevent hemodialysis vascular access failure: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;61:112–122.
Paulson WD, Moist L, Lok CE. Vascular access surveillance: an ongoing controversy. 
Kidney Int. 2012;81:132–142.
Rayner HC, et al. Vascular access results from the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice 
Patterns Study (DOPPS): performance against Kidney Disease Outcomes Qual-
ity Initiative (K/DOQI) Clinical Practice guidelines. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004;44  
(5 suppl 3):22–26.
Roca-Tey R, et al. Five years of vascular access stenosis surveillance by blood flow 
rate measurements during hemodialysis using the Delta-H method. J Vasc Access. 
2012;13:321–328.
Saran R, et al. Association between vascular access failures and the use of specific 
drugs: the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS). Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2002;40:1255–1263.
Sessa C, et al. Treatment of hand ischemia following angioaccess surgery using the 
distal revascularization interval-ligation technique with preservation of vascular 
access: description of an 18-case series. Ann Vasc Surg. 2004;18:685–694.
Stern AB, Klemmer PJ. High-output heart failure secondary to arteriovenous fistula. 
Hemodial Int. 2011;15:104–107.
Tessitore N, et al. Clinical access assessment. J Vasc Access. 2014;15(suppl 7):20–27.
Tordoir J, et al. EBPG on vascular access. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007;22(suppl 2):  
ii88–ii117.
White JJ, et al. Paulson relation between static venous pressure (VP), hemodialysis graft 
blood flow (Q), and stenosis: analysis by fluid mechanics model [Abstract]. J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:F-PO531.
Zasuwa G, et al. Automated intravascular access pressure surveillance reduces throm-
bosis rates. Semin Dial. 2010;23:527–535.
Web References
An excellent teaching guide, introduction to vascular access, with pictures of anatomy, 
etc. http://www.fistulafirst.org/atlas/index.html.
Information on interventional nephrology, annual meetings, credentialing, publica -
tions, and statement papers. http://www.asdin.org.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch008.indd   154 09/10/14   1:07 am