155
Venous Catheter 
Infections and Other 
Complications
Loay Salman, Arif Asif, 
and  Michael Allon
The main problems associated with venous catheters are infection, 
poor flow, thrombosis, and central venous stenosis.
 I. INFECTION. Despite the best practices detailed in Chapter 7 
 (Table 7.3), infections do occur with venous catheters, and at a rate 
substantially higher than with arteriovenous (AV) fistulas. Infec-
tion is the leading cause of catheter loss and increases morbidity 
and mortality. Most often, infection results from contamination 
of the catheter connectors or from lumen contamination during 
dialysis or from infused solutions. Infection also may arise from 
the migration of the patient’s own skin flora through the puncture 
site and onto the outer catheter surface. Catheters can sometimes 
become colonized from more remote sites during bacteremia.
A. Exit-site infection  can be diagnosed when there is erythema, 
discharge, crusting, and tenderness at the skin exit site, but 
no tunnel tenderness or purulence. Treatment with topical 
antibiotic cream and oral antibiotics may be sufficient. These 
infections can be prevented by meticulous exit-site care. The 
patient should be investigated for nasal carriage of Staphylo -
coccus and if present, treated with intranasal mupirocin cream 
(half tube twice a day to each nostril for 5 days) to prevent fu-
ture infections. With exit-site infection, the  catheter must be 
removed if systemic signs of infection develop (leukocytosis or 
temperature >38°C), if pus can be expressed from the track of 
the catheter, or if the infection persists or recurs after an initial 
course of antibiotics. If blood cultures are positive, then the 
catheter should be removed.
B. Tunnel infection  is infection along the subcutaneous tunnel 
extending proximal to the cuff toward the insertion site and 
venotomy. Typically, there is marked tenderness, swelling, and 
erythema along the catheter tract in association with purulent 
drainage from the exit site. This can result in systemic bactere-
mia. In the presence of drainage or signs of systemic infection, 
the catheter should be removed immediately and antibiotic 
therapy prescribed.
C. Catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRBSI) . Patients present 
with signs and symptoms of systemic infection, which may 
9
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   155 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
156
range from minimal to severe. Milder cases present with fe-
ver or chills, whereas more severe cases exhibit hemodynamic 
instability. Patients may develop septic symptoms after ini -
tiation of dialysis, suggesting systemic release of bacteria 
and/or endotoxin from the catheter. There can be signs of 
metastatic infection, including endocarditis, osteomyelitis, 
epidural abscess, and septic arthritis. Gram-positive organ-
isms are the causative organisms in the majority of cases, but 
gram- negative infections occur in a very sizeable minority. 
For details on how to treat CRBSI in dialysis patients, caregiv-
ers can refer to valuable information available on the dialysis 
section of the U.S. Centers of Disease Control (CDC) website 
(http://www.cdc.gov/dialysis), the NKF KDOQI 2006 vascular 
access guidelines (NKF, 2006), the European Renal Best Prac-
tices (ERBP) access guidelines (Tordoir, 2007), the Infectious 
Disease  Society of North America (IDSA) guidelines update 
for management of CRBSI (Mermel, 2009), and the ERBP com-
mentary on the IDSA guidelines (Vanholder, 2010). Treatment 
algorithms and tips from the IDSA are reproduced in Figure 9.1  
and Tables 9.1 and  9.2, and key recommendations from the 
ERBP are shown in Figure 9.2.
 The principles of CRBSI management in dialysis patients are 
different from the infectious disease guidelines for treatment 
of infection in short-term central venous catheters. In hemo-
dialysis, the venous catheter is a lifeline that sometimes can 
be replaced only with great difficulty. Thus, the guidelines in-
clude a variety of catheter salvage maneuvers, which involve 
use of antibiotic-containing catheter locks or replacing the in-
fected catheter with a new catheter in the same location over a 
guidewire. However, these catheter salvage techniques should 
be used only in limited, defined circumstances. If a patient’s 
condition worsens after a relatively short trial of catheter 
 salvage, the catheter must be removed to minimize the risk of 
spreading the infection to body organs.
1. Blood and catheter tip cultures . I n working up a suspected 
CRBSI, cultures can be obtained from the catheter hub, 
from a peripheral vein, or from the blood lines during di -
alysis treatment. The IDSA recommendations are to take 
blood cultures from a catheter hub and from a peripheral 
vein and, when a catheter has been removed because of 
suspicion of infection, to also culture the distal 5 cm of 
its tip. One is looking for both blood cultures or for both 
the blood culture and a catheter tip culture to be positive 
with the same organism to confirm a diagnosis of CRBSI. 
When taking cultures from the skin or from a catheter 
hub, the IDSA recommends cleaning and sterilizing the 
area with alcoholic chlorhexidine rather than povidone-
iodine, and allowing the antiseptic to dry before sampling; 
this avoids contamination of the cultured material with 
liquid antiseptic. The IDSA guidelines recognize that ob-
taining blood from the dialysis bloodline is an acceptable 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   156 09/10/14   1:08 am
157Chapter 9 / Venous Catheter Infections and Other Complications
FIGURE 9.1 Pathway for treatment of cuffed hemodialysis catheter infections according to the Infectious Disease Society of America, 2009 Update. HD, hemodialysis; CVC, central 
venous (dialysis) catheter; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography. (Reproduced with permission from Mermel LA, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of intravascular catheter-related infection: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49:1–45.)
Obtain blood cultures from catheter and peripheral vein or
bloodline if peripheral vein not feasible
Tunneled HD catheter
with suspected CRBSI
Empiric antibiotics (Table 9.1)
+ Antibiotic lock (Table 9.3)
Coagulase-
negative
staphylococcus
Gram-negative
bacilli
Staphylococcus
aureus
Candida
albicans
Stop
antibiotics
Remove CVC
Administer
antibiotics
Resolution of bacteremia/fungemia
and fever in 2–3 d
Persistent bacteremia/
fungemia and feverNegative blood cultures
Antibiotics x 10–14 d
Retain CVC, continue
antibiotic lock
OR
Guidewire
CVC exchange
Antibiotic 10–14 d
Retain CVC, continue
antibiotic lock
OR
Guidewire
CVC exchange
Guidewire CVC
exchange
Administer antifungal
therapy for 14 d
after the first negative
blood culture
Administer
antibiotics x 4–6 wk
look for metastatic
infections
(thrombosis,
endocarditis)
Remove CVC
AND
antibiotic x 3 wk
if TEE is negative
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   157 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
158
Empirical Antibiotic Dosing Pending Culture Results
Vancomycin plus empirical gram-negative rod coverage based on local 
antibiogram data
OR
Vancomycin plus gentamicin
Typical doses: (Doses need to be adjusted for residual renal function and for 
enhanced dialytic removal in case of frequent or extended dialysis, very high 
efficiency, high-flux treatments, or hemodiafiltration. Monitor predialysis trough 
levels if possible
(Cefazolin may be used in place of vancomycin in units with a low prevalence of 
methicillin-resistant staphylococci)
Vancomycin: 20-mg/kg loading dose infused during the last hour of the dialysis 
session, and then 500 mg during the last 30 min of each subsequent dialysis 
session
Gentamicin (or tobramycin): 1 mg/kg, not to exceed 100 mg after each dialysis 
session
Ceftazidime: 1 g iv after each dialysis session
Cefazolin: 20 mg/kg iv after each dialysis session
For Candida Infection
An echinocandin (caspofungin 70 mg iv loading dose followed by 50 mg iv daily; 
intravenous micafungin 100 mg iv daily; or anidulafungin 200 mg iv loading dose, 
followed by 100 mg iv daily); fluconazole (200 mg orally daily); or amphotericin B
Antibiotic Dosing for Patients Who Are Undergoing 
Hemodialysis9.1
TABLE
iv, intravenous.
Adapted from Mermel LA, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
intravascular catheter-related infection: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49:1–45, with permission.
substitute for peripheral blood cultures in many hemodi -
alysis patients.
 The ERBP ad hoc advisory recommendations are similar to 
what the IDSA recommends. They too, recognize the dif-
ficulties in obtaining cultures from peripheral veins in he -
modialysis patients, and believe that a practical alternative 
is to simply draw blood cultures from the dialysis circuit. 
Blood from the circuit during dialysis probably represents 
peripheral blood rather than localized catheter blood, and 
so a positive blood culture drawn from the bloodline may 
reflect a source of bacteremia other than at the catheter. 
The ERBP group suggests that the best way to deal with this 
possibility is by evaluating clinical history, examination, 
imaging, and targeted laboratory testing, including urine 
culture if possible.
2. Indications for immediate catheter removal . I f there is evidence 
of septic thrombosis, endocarditis, or osteomyelitis, or of 
severe sepsis with hypotension, then the dialysis catheter 
needs to be removed immediately. The same recommenda-
tion generally holds for tunnel infection with fever. Dialysis 
should be continued with a temporary catheter inserted at 
a different location.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   158 09/10/14   1:08 am
159Chapter 9 / Venous Catheter Infections and Other Complications
Blood and Catheter Cultures
Peripheral blood samples should be obtained for culture from vessels that are not 
intended for future use in creating a dialysis fistula (e.g., hand veins).
When a peripheral blood sample cannot be obtained, blood samples may be 
drawn during hemodialysis from bloodlines connected to the dialysis catheter.
In patients with suspected CRBSI for whom blood cultures have been obtained 
and for whom antibiotic therapy has been initiated, antibiotic therapy can be 
discontinued if both sets of blood cultures have negative results and no other 
source of infection is identified.
When a peripheral blood sample cannot be obtained, no other catheter is in 
place from which to obtain an additional blood sample, there is no drainage from 
the insertion site available for culture, and there is no clinical evidence for an 
alternate source of infection, then positive results of culture performed on a blood 
sample obtained from a catheter should lead to continuation of antimicrobial 
therapy for possible CRBSI in a symptomatic hemodialysis patient.
Catheter Removal, Change, and Salvage with Antimicrobial Lock
The infected catheter should always be removed for patients with hemodialysis 
CRBSI due to S. aureus, Pseudomonas sp., or Candida sp. and a temporary 
(nontunneled catheter) should be inserted into another anatomical site. If 
absolutely no alternative sites are available for catheter insertion, then exchange 
the infected catheter over a guidewire.
When a hemodialysis catheter is removed for CRBSI, a long-term hemodialysis 
catheter can be placed once blood cultures with negative results are obtained.
For hemodialysis CRBSI due to other pathogens (e.g., gram-negative bacilli other 
than Pseudomonas sp. or coagulase-negative staphylococci), a patient can initiate 
empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy without immediate catheter removal. If 
the symptoms persist or if there is evidence of a metastatic infection, the catheter 
should be removed. If the symptoms that prompted initiation of antibiotic therapy 
(fever, chills, hemodynamic instability, or altered mental status) resolve within 2–3 
d and there is no metastatic infection, then the infected catheter can be exchanged 
over a guidewire for a new, long-term hemodialysis catheter.
Alternatively, for patients for whom catheter removal is not indicated (i.e., 
those with resolution of symptoms and bacteremia within 2–3 d after initiation of 
systemic antibiotics and an absence of metastatic infection), the catheter can 
be retained, and an antibiotic lock can be used as adjunctive therapy after each 
dialysis session for 10–14 d.
Antibiotic Therapy
Empirical antibiotic therapy should include vancomycin and coverage for 
gram-negative bacilli, based on the local antibiogram (e.g., third-generation 
cephalosporin, carbapenem, or beta-lactam/beta-lactamase combination)
Patients who receive empirical vancomycin and who are found to have CRBSI 
due to methicillin-susceptible S. aureus should be switched to cefazolin. For 
cefazolin, use a dosage of 20 mg/kg (actual body weight), rounded to the nearest 
500-mg increment, after dialysis.
A 4–6-wk antibiotic course should be administered if there is persistent 
bacteremia or fungemia (i.e., 172 hr in duration) after hemodialysis catheter removal 
or for patients with endocarditis or suppurative thrombophlebitis, and 6–8 wk of 
therapy should be administered for the treatment of osteomyelitis in adults.
Patients receiving dialysis who have CRBSI due to vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci can be treated with either daptomycin (6 mg/kg after each dialysis 
session) or oral linezolid (600 mg every 12 hr).
Unique Aspects of Managing Patients Receiving Hemodialy-
sis through Catheters for Whom Catheter-Related Infection 
Is Suspected or Proven9.2
TABLE
(continued )
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   159 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
160
Antibiotic Locks
Antibiotic lock is indicated for patients with CRBSI involving long-term catheters 
with no signs of exit-site or tunnel infection for whom catheter salvage is the goal.
For CRBSI, antibiotic lock should not be used alone; instead, it should be 
used in conjunction with systemic antimicrobial therapy, with both regimens 
administered for 7–14 d.
Dwell times for antibiotic lock solutions should generally not exceed 48 hr 
before reinstallation of lock solution; preferably, reinstallation should take place 
every 24 hr for ambulatory patients with femoral catheters. However, for patients 
who are undergoing hemodialysis, the lock solution can be renewed after every 
dialysis session.
Catheter removal is recommended for CRBSI due to S. aureus and Candida sp., 
instead of treatment with antibiotic lock and catheter retention, unless there are 
unusual extenuating circumstances (e.g., no alternative catheter insertion site).
For patients with multiple positive catheter-drawn blood cultures that grow 
coagulase-negative staphylococci or gram-negative bacilli and concurrent 
negative peripheral blood cultures, antibiotic lock therapy can be given without 
systemic therapy for 10–14 d.
For vancomycin, the concentration should be at least 1000 times higher than 
the MIC of the microorganism involved.
At this time, there are insufficient data to recommend an ethanol lock for the 
treatment of CRBSI.
Follow-up Cultures
It is not necessary to confirm negative culture results before guidewire exchange 
of a catheter for a patient with hemodialysis-related CRBSI if the patient is 
asymptomatic.
Surveillance blood cultures should be obtained 1 wk after completion of an 
antibiotic course for CRBSI if the catheter has been retained. If the blood cultures 
have positive results, the catheter should be removed, and a new, long-term 
dialysis catheter should be placed after additional blood cultures are obtained that 
have negative results.
Reproduced from: Mermel LA, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of intravascular catheter-related infection: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49:1–45.
9.2
TABLE Unique Aspects of Managing Patients Receiving Hemodialy-
sis through Catheters for Whom Catheter-Related Infection 
Is Suspected or Proven (continued)
3. Choice of antibiotic . Gram-positive organisms, primarily
Staphylococcus spp., are the most common, but gram-
negative organisms may be isolated in up to 40% of cases.
Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy should be started im-
mediately after drawing cultures. Dialysis units should
keep a database of all CRBSI, including causative organ-
isms, their susceptibility, and response to therapy, as this
information is extremely valuable in guiding antibiotic
therapy for new cases. If methicillin-resistant Staphylo -
coccus is known to be common in the local hemodialysis
population, the initial therapy should include vancomycin, 
rather than a first-generation cephalosporin. Adequate em-
piric gram-negative coverage can be provided with either
an aminoglycoside or a third-generation cephalosporin.
However, aminoglycosides may cause ototoxicity in up to
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   160 09/10/14   1:08 am
161Chapter 9 / Venous Catheter Infections and Other Complications
20% of hemodialysis patients. If treatment was begun for 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus and the culture shows 
a methicillin-sensitive organism, the treatment should be 
changed to cefazolin or a similar antibiotic.
4. Dose of antibiotic . It is practical to use antibiotics that can
be given at the end of each dialysis session and maintain 
desired blood levels during the interdialytic interval. Some 
initial doses are given in Tables 9.1 and 9.2 ( from the IDSA, 
Mermel, 2009). However, these doses may need to be in-
creased in patients with substantial residual kidney func -
tion or those receiving intensive dialysis treatments such as 
frequent dialysis, high-intensity hemodiafiltration, or con -
tinuous renal replacement therapy. Where possible, predi -
alysis trough drug levels should be monitored, but this is 
usually practical only in the inpatient setting. The strategy 
of dosing antibiotics in hemodialysis and patients under -
going continuous 
 renal replacement therapy  is discussed 
in more detail in  Chapters 15 and 35, and detailed dosing 
regimens can be found in Mermel (2009).
FIGURE 9.2 Pathway for treatment of cuffed hemodialysis catheter infections  according 
to the European Best Practices Group, 2010 Update. (Adapted with permission from 
Vanholder R, et al. Catheter-related blood stream infections (CRBSI): a European view. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25:1753–1756.)
Suspected catheter infection
Start systemic antibiotics
(see Table 9.1)
Immediate catheter removal
impossible or contraindicated
If guidewire replacement
undesirable or impossible
Repeat at 72 hr and check for
persistence of clinical signs
Repetitive blood cultures 1 wk after
completion of antibiotic cure
If positive: remove
catheter
Maintain catheter in place
(salvage) coupled to antibiotic
lock in catheter (Table 9.3)
Exchange catheter over
guidewire after 3 d of
successful antibiotic treatment
-   Infection with S. aureus, P. aeruginosa,
    multiresistant organisms or fungi
-   Metastatic infection
       -   Endocarditis
       -   Osteomyelitis
-   Sepsis
-   Tunnel infection with fever
-   Infection with germs other than S. aureus,
    P. aeruginosa, multiresistant organisms
    or fungi
-   No metastatic infection
-   No sepsis
-   No tunnel infection
Tunnel infection
without fever
First choice:
removel of catheter and
culturing of catheter tip (see C.I)
If infection does not resolve
Exit-site infection without fever: try local
antibiotic application
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   161 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
162
5. Duration of treatment and course . Antibiotics should be dis-
continued promptly if the original blood cultures had no
growth and the patient’s symptoms are consistent with
absence of infection. In the event of positive cultures, the
initially chosen antibiotic regimen should be adjusted once 
bacterial sensitivities are available. A 2–3-week course of
systemic antibiotics is adequate in uncomplicated cases of 
catheter-related bacteremia. A longer course (4–8 weeks) is 
indicated if there is a metastatic infection, such as endocar-
ditis or osteomyelitis (see Figure 9.1 and Table 9.2).
6. Catheter removal and exchange over a guidewire. From an infec-
tious disease perspective, the catheter is always best re-
moved whenever a CRSBI occurs, regardless of the causal
organism. However, since the patient will continue to re -
quire dialysis support, placement of a temporary catheter
becomes necessary. Thus, the decision to remove the cath-
eter should be individualized on the basis of the severity of 
sepsis and availability of alternative venous access sites. If
the patient is clinically septic and unstable despite admin-
istration of systemic antibiotics, the catheter should be re-
moved as soon as possible. Attempts to maintain the same 
catheter by treating through the infection have not been
successful, with a success rate of <30% and with the risk
of metastatic infections. However, several studies support
the use of guidewire exchange in patients whose symptoms 
resolve within 2–3 days of initiating intravenous antibiot -
ics, reporting a 70%–80% catheter salvage and cure. Thus,
removing the infected catheter (and with it presumably the 
biofilm harboring the bacteria) and replacing it with a new 
catheter through the same venotomy preserves the venous 
access site while curing the infection. Guidewire replace -
ment should be done only if the symptoms that prompted
initiation of antibiotic treatment have resolved over a pe -
riod of 2–3 days of initial antibiotic therapy and there is no 
evidence of metastatic infection.
a. Catheter infection with  Staphylococcus aureus , Pseudo-
monas sp., or  Candida sp. When the initial infection
is with one of these organisms, both the IDSA and ERBP
recommend removal of the catheter as soon as this is
known. Exchange of the catheter over a guidewire or at -
tempts at catheter lock salvage (see what follows) are not 
recommended with these infecting organisms unless ex-
tenuating circumstances are present.
7. Antibiotic locks to treat established catheter infection . Another
approach to treatment of patients with catheter-related
bacteremia is to instill a concentrated antibiotic lock into
the catheter lumen at the end of each dialysis session, as
an adjunct to systemic antibiotics (Table 9.3). The antibiotic 
lock is used only for the duration of systemic antibiotics, af-
ter which a standard heparin or citrate lock is resumed. In
about two-thirds of cases, the antibiotic lock successfully
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   162 09/10/14   1:08 am
163Chapter 9 / Venous Catheter Infections and Other Complications
sterilizes the catheter biofilm, thereby permitting success -
ful treatment of the bacteremia while salvaging the infected 
catheter. In the remaining one-third of cases, the patient has 
persistent fever or positive surveillance cultures, in which 
case prompt catheter replacement is indicated. The antibi-
otic lock protocol is most commonly successful in catheter-
related bacteremia due to Staphylococcus epidermidis (75%) 
or gram-negative infections (87%), and less often successful 
in S. aureus infections (40%) (Allon, 2004; Poole, 2004), for 
which it is not recommended. There is a large amount of 
leakage from the solution instilled into a catheter lock over 
24 hours (Sungur, 2007; Schilcher, 2014). For this reason, the 
concentration of antibiotic in the lock must be substantially 
higher than the minimal inhibitory concentration of the or-
ganism being targeted. Usually, the lock solution also con-
tains either 2,500 or 5,000 IU/mL heparin or is mixed with 
4% sodium citrate. Some commonly used antibiotic lock 
concentrations are shown in Table 9.3.
8. Follow-up blood cultures . Surveillance blood cultures nor -
mally are obtained after 72 hours of treatment, depend-
ing on the patient’s clinical course. Also, it is important to 
obtain follow-up blood cultures 1 week after the planned 
treatment course has finished to confirm that there has not 
been a recurrence of infection.
D. Complications of CRBSI. Delay in therapy or prolonged attempts 
to salvage an infected cuffed catheter can lead to serious com-
plications, including endocarditis, osteomyelitis, suppurative 
thrombophlebitis, and spinal epidural abscess. The last is 
a rare but serious neurologic complication in hemodialysis 
Amikacin 25 mg/mL
Amphotericin B 2.5 mg/mL
Ampicillin 10 mg/mL
Cefazolin 5 mg/mL
Cefazolin 5 mg/mL plus gentamicin 1 mg/mL
Ceftazidime 5 mg/mL
Ciprofloxacin 0.2 mg/mL
Daptomycin 5 mg/mL
Linezolid 1 mg/mL
Gentamicin 1 mg/mL
Gentamicin 1 mg/mL plus vancomycin 2.5 mg/mL
Vancomycin 2.5–5.0 mg/mL
b
Some Antimicrobial Concentrations in Lock Solutionsa
9.3
TABLE
aThese can be mixed with heparin, 2,500 or 5,000 IU/mL, or with 4% citrate.
bVancomycin at 20 mg/mL showed signs of incompatibility with 4% sodium citrate.
Mermel LA, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of intravascular 
catheter-related infection: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2009;49:1–45; Joshi AJ, Hart PD. Antibiotic catheter locks in the treatment of tunneled he-
modialysis catheter-related blood stream infection. Semin Dial. 2013;26:223–226; Dotson B, et al. 
Physical compatibility of 4% sodium citrate with selected antimicrobial agents. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm. 2010;67:1195–1198.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   163 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
164
patients. In one series, 50% of cases of spinal epidural abscess 
were associated with attempted salvage of an infected cuffed 
venous catheter (Kovalik, 1996). Presenting complaints are fe-
ver, backache, local spinal tenderness, leg pain and weakness, 
sphincter dysfunction, paresis, and/or paralysis. For diagno-
sis, magnetic resonance imaging appears to be less sensitive 
than computed tomography–myelography. Plain computed 
tomographic scanning without myelography has low sensi-
tivity and can give misleading results (e.g., disc protrusion). 
Early (immediate) decompressive surgery is usually  advised, 
although rarely patients can be successfully treated with anti-
biotics only.
Endocarditis should be suspected in patients in whom fever 
and bacteremia persist despite appropriate antibiotics and 
catheter removal. This complication is seen most commonly 
in the setting of S. aureus bacteremia. Signs include develop -
ment of symptomatic heart failure and a new heart murmur. 
A transthoracic or transesophageal echocardiogram confirms 
the presence of valvular vegetations and insufficiency.
E. Aspirin. A spirin treatment has been reported to be associated 
with a reduced incidence of S. aureus–related CRBSI (Sed-
lacek, 2007). Prior aspirin use also has been associated with 
reduced symptoms of infection and size of vegetations on car-
diovascular implantable electronic devices (Habib, 2013). This 
finding needs to be confirmed, and use of aspirin to limit in-
fection incidence in tunneled venous catheters is not recom-
mended by guideline groups at this time.
 II. POOR CATHETER FLOW (CATHETER DYSFUNCTION) . Ca theter dysfunc-
tion can be defined as a failure to deliver a blood flow rate of at 
least 300 mL/min at a prepump pressure that is less negative than 
−250 mm Hg. Associated problems are inability to aspirate blood 
freely from the catheter lumens, and frequent pressure alarms 
not responsive to patient repositioning or catheter flushing.
A. Initial (early) dysfunction. Re cently placed catheters can have poor 
flow due to a kink, compression within the catheter tunnel from 
edema, malposition with the catheter having been inserted into 
the azygous or hemiazygous veins, or improper tip placement 
(Figure 9.3). A chest x-ray is valuable in evaluation. Tunnel 
edema usually subsides within 24 hours. Presence of a kink or 
a malpositioned tip requires replacement of the catheter using 
a different tunnel or a different length of the catheter. It is also 
important to have an insertion site in the lower part of the neck 
close to the clavicle; a high insertion site in the neck can cause 
the catheter to become “positional, ” with blood flow changing 
with the position of the neck. Eventually, the catheter tips move 
up with neck movement, leading to poor blood flow. An exit site 
close to the breast tissue can also pull the tip of the catheter 
high into the superior  vena cava. Exposed cuff or tunnel due  
to traction on the line or erosion of tissue increases risk of 
 malfunction and infection. These catheters require exchange.  
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   164 09/10/14   1:08 am
165Chapter 9 / Venous Catheter Infections and Other Complications
If the tunnel is eroded or infected, a new tunnel or new place-
ment site is required. Left internal jugular catheters have a 
higher incidence of dysfunction than those inserted on the right 
side (Engstrom, 2013) for reasons not entirely clear but prob-
ably related to the twisty course required to reach the opening 
to the right atrium.
1. Alteplase protocols. Sometimes, early dysfunction can be due 
to intracatheter thrombosis. A short (1 hour) or prolonged 
(overnight) instillation of tissue plasminogen activator 
(tPA) is usually effective in treating luminal thrombosis in 
the short term, although long-term catheter survival is not 
very good . Several tPA protocols have been described (Sa-
vader, 2001; Clase, 2001) (Table 9.4). Short protocols do not 
necessarily perform better than dwell protocols (Vercaigne, 
2012). For a detailed description of various alteplase proto-
cols, see BC Renal Agency (2011).
B. Late dysfunction . Late dysfunction is due usually to formation 
of a fibrin sleeve (Figure 9.4) or a mural thrombus. Almost all 
catheters inserted into a central vein develop a fibrin sleeve 
within a week or two of insertion. Such fibrin sleeves are ini-
tially clinically silent until they obstruct the ports at the distal 
end of the catheter. Generally, saline infuses into a port, but 
aspiration is difficult, producing a so-called “ball-valve” effect. 
FIGURE 9.3 Kink: Left internal jugular venous catheter with a kink.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   165 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
166
Fibrin sleeves may serve as a nidus for infection. The use of 
warfarin or other anticoagulants on a chronic basis has not 
been shown to reduce  fibrin sleeve or catheter thrombus for -
mation (Mokrzycki, 2001).
1. T reatment of fibrin sheath . T he presence of a fibrin sheath is 
usually determined at the time of catheter exchange using 
radiocontrast material administered through the venous 
port of the old catheter (Figure 9.4). The condition is usu-
ally treated with an angioplasty balloon catheter inserted 
on a guidewire through the catheter tunnel. The balloon 
catheter is passed into the lumen of the fibrin sheath and 
is then  inflated to disrupt the fibroepithelial sheath. An 
8-mm diameter balloon usually is sufficient to accomplish 
this task. Disruption of the sheath is then confirmed by a 
repeat radiocontrast injection after the new catheter has 
been inserted. The balloon angioplasty technique results 
in restoration of catheter blood flow rates sufficient for 
 dialysis in the great majority of patients (Rasmussen, 2010; 
Shanaah, 2013).
C. Recurrent catheter dysfunction. A  substantial minority of patients 
with dysfunctional catheters treated by catheter replacement 
Catheter Lock and Aspirate Technique
Alteplase (1 mg/mL): Infuse 2 mg or volume of catheter into each catheter lumen 
as needed. For catheter lumen volumes >2 mL, after 2 mL of tPA is injected, inject 
sufficient normal saline to fill the catheter. For example, a 40-cm catheter with 2.6 
mL volume per lumen: alteplase 2 mL injected (1 mg/mL), then 0.6 mL normal saline.
After initial administration, let the thrombolytic dwell for 30 min and then 
aspirate. If there is no blood return, let the thrombolytic dwell for another 30 min. If 
there is still no blood return, repeat the dose and aspirate again at 30 and 60 min.
If a catheter is “occluded” and the thrombolytic cannot be injected, connect 
a three-way stopcock to the occluded catheter hub, and with a 20-mL nonfilled 
syringe aspirate on the catheter. The remaining port of the three-way stopcock 
should have the volume of thrombolytic in a syringe. With negative pressure on the 
catheter, turn the stopcock so it is now open to the catheter and the thrombolytic. 
The negative pressure will be transferred to the thrombolytic syringe, aspirating its 
contents into the catheter.
Infusion Technique
When the dwell technique is unsuccessful, attempt a short-term infusion.
Begin by loading the catheter with tPA 2 mL per lumen. The concentration of 
tPA is 1 mg/mL. Once loaded, an infusion of tPA, 1 mg per lumen per hour, is run 
for 2–4 hr and then rechecked.
The amount of thrombolytic utilized with infusion is probably not of 
sufficient amount to cause bleeding complications, but absolute and relative 
contraindications should be considered, and then risk versus benefit.
Locking catheters as well as biweekly or monthly instillations of thrombolytics 
have reportedly reduced catheter occlusions.
Dosing of Tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA) for Occluded 
Catheters9.4
TABLE
For additional thrombolytic protocols, see Lok (2006) and BC Renal Agency (2011).
Adapted with permission from www.venousaccess.com.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   166 09/10/14   1:08 am
167Chapter 9 / Venous Catheter Infections and Other Complications
FIGURE 9.4 Fibrin sheath: left internal jugular venous catheter with fibrin sheath 
that extends beyond the catheter tip that has been retracted.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   167 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
168
and balloon angioplasty will develop recurrent catheter dys -
function. Such patients will require multiple catheter replace-
ments (Rasmussen, 2010). There is no ideal solution for such 
patients. Use of anticoagulants has not been shown to help, 
and the best resolution is conversion to an AV access where 
possible.
III. THROMBOSIS
A. Intraluminal thrombosis . Catheter thrombosis is commonly
treated by instillation of tPA for 1 hour or longer. Some com-
monly used protocols are given in Table 9.4. Mechanical 
brushing of thrombus has been suggested, but is unpopular. 
Prophylactic oral anticoagulation with warfarin does not im-
prove catheter patency unless therapeutic levels of anticoagu-
lation with high INR are achieved, and this can be associated 
with bleeding complications. Moreover, the fear of calciphy -
laxis and skin necrosis with warfarin therapy tends to limit its 
use in dialysis patients.
B. Central vein or intracardiac thrombosis  can occur  in association 
with large, indwelling catheters, and these can rarely result in 
embolic complications. Intra-atrial thrombi need prolonged 
systemic anticoagulation ( for 6 months or longer) and follow-
up for resolution.
C. Embolic complications . Large clots adherent to the end of the 
catheter or to the vessel wall can be clinically silent or can give 
rise to embolic events. Large mural thrombi can progress to 
stenosis and central vein thrombosis. Treatment options for 
a ball thrombus or a catheter-associated right atrial throm-
bus include simple catheter removal, systemic or catheter-
assisted fibrinolytic therapy, and, rarely, thoracotomy with 
thrombectomy.
I V. CENTRAL VENOUS STENOSIS
A. Causes. Central venous stenosis arises from endothelial in -
jury at the sites of catheter–endothelial contact through the 
release of a variety of growth factors. The incidence increases 
with the use of stiff, nonsilicone catheters; with the use of the 
subclavian approach (presumably because of higher angular 
stresses on the catheter in the subclavian position); and in 
patients with previous catheter-related infections. Risk fac-
tors include a history of multiple catheter insertion (including 
small and large venous catheters as well as peripherally in-
serted central catheters, so-called PICC lines) and prolonged 
duration of such catheters. Collateral vessels usually develop 
but may not be adequate to relieve extremity edema.
B. Presentation and diagnosis . Stenosis or occlusion of the sub-
clavian vein, brachiocephalic vein, or superior vena cava 
usually presents with venous hypertension (swelling of the 
breast, shoulder, neck, and face) or vascular access dysfunc-
tion (high venous pressure on dialysis, inadequate dialysis and 
prolonged bleeding). A stenosis may be asymptomatic and 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   168 09/10/14   1:08 am
169Chapter 9 / Venous Catheter Infections and Other Complications
clinically silent until unmasked by the creation of an AV fistula. 
Thrombosis of the AV access may result. Occlusion of multiple 
central veins in the chest can result in the  development of su-
perior vena cava syndrome. Careful history and examination 
will often reveal multiple central venous catheter scars in such 
patients. There may be presence of a cardiac rhythm device. 
Multiple collateral blood vessels are visible on examination.
C. T reatment . L igation of the vascular access produces the most 
rapid improvement but sacrifices the access. Initial antico -
agulation (with heparin followed by warfarin) and elevation of 
the upper extremity on the involved side may ameliorate the 
symptoms and signs if thrombosis is present. More definitive 
therapy usually is required: Balloon angioplasty has been used 
for stenosis, but the lesion tends to recur. Stent placement 
combined with angioplasty (Figure 9.5) is indicated in elastic 
(easily distensible) central vein lesions or if a dilated stenosis 
recurs within a 3-month period. However, stent placement 
rarely solves the problem long term, because stenosis can re-
occur around the stent. Stenosis in the subclavian vein some-
times can be relieved by an axillary vein to internal jugular 
vein bypass.
FIGURE 9.5 Central vein stent: left brachiocephalic vein occlusion after angioplasty and 
stent placement.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   169 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
170
 V. CATHETER ADHESION. Over the long term, indwelling catheters can 
develop adhesions to venous or atrial endothelium. Adherence 
should be suspected when an attempt to remove the catheter in-
duces severe pain or requires significant traction. The heart or 
mediastinum may be pulled to one side when visualized under 
fluoroscopy. Removal of adhered catheters is a challenge and can 
require invasive techniques, including laser dissection or open 
surgical removal. Some novel closed maneuvers have been re-
ported to be successful (Hong, 2011).
VI. PORT CLAMP FRACTURE. It is not uncommon to see a fractured port 
or clamp on a tunneled dialysis catheter. This can lead to suction 
of air or inability to double lock the port after dialysis, with an
increased risk of bleeding (Amin, 2011). Often, one can replace
one or both ports or clamps using replacement kits for specific
catheters without having to change the entire catheter. If there
has been port fracture with air suction, there is a higher risk of in-
fection, and at the time of repair, prophylactic antibiotics should 
be given after drawing blood cultures.
References and Suggested Readings
Abad CL, Pulia MS, Safdar N. Does the nose know? An update on MRSA decoloniza-
tion strategies. Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2013;15:455–464.
Allon M. Dialysis catheter-related bacteremia: Treatment and prophylaxis. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2004;44:779–791.
Amin P , et al. Broken clamp on a cuffed tunneled catheter—are all catheters equal? 
Semin Dial. 2011;24:104–106.
Asif A, et al. Transvenous cardiac implantable electronic devices and hemodialysis 
catheters: recommendations to curtail a potentially lethal combination. Semin 
Dial. 2012;25:582–586.
BC Renal Agency. Alteplase use for occluded hemodialysis catheters. Vascular Ac-
cess Guideline. Approved July 24, 2006; Updated March 4, 2011. http://www  
.bcrenalagency.ca/sites/default/files/documents/files/Use-of-Alteplase-FINAL-
March-4-2011.pdf. Accessed May 26, 2014.
Clase CM, et al. Thrombolysis for restoration of patency to haemodialysis central 
 venous catheters: a systematic review. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2001;11:127–36.
Dotson B, et al. Physical compatibility of 4% sodium citrate with selected antimicrobial 
agents. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2010;67:1195–1198.
Engstrom BI, et al. Tunneled internal jugular hemodialysis catheters: impact of lat -
erality and tip position on catheter dysfunction and infection rates. J Vasc Interv 
Radiol. 2013;24:1295–1302.
Habib A, et al; for the Mayo Cardiovascular Infections Study Group. Impact of prior 
aspirin therapy on clinical manifestations of cardiovascular implantable electronic 
device infections. Europace. 2013;15:227–235.
Hickson LJ, et al. Clinical presentation and outcomes of cardiovascular implantable elec-
tronic device infections in hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;64:104–110.
Hong JH. A breakthrough technique for the removal of a hemodialysis catheter stuck 
in the central vein: endoluminal balloon dilatation of the stuck catheter. J Vasc 
Access. 2011;12:381–384.
Hwang HS, et al. Comparison of the palindrome vs. step-tip tunneled hemodialysis 
catheter: a prospective randomized trial. Semin Dial. 2012;25:587–591.
Joshi AJ, Hart PD. Antibiotic catheter locks in the treatment of tunneled hemodialysis 
catheter-related blood stream infection. Semin Dial. 2013;26:223–226.
Kovalik EC, et al. A clustering of epidural abscesses in chronic hemodialysis 
 patients: 
risks of salvaging access catheters in cases of infection. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
1996;7:2264–2267.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   170 09/10/14   1:08 am
171Chapter 9 / Venous Catheter Infections and Other Complications
Lok CE, et al. Trisodium citrate 4% - an alternative to heparin capping of haemodialysis 
catheters. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007;22:477–483.
Mandolfo S, et al. Hemodialysis tunneled central venous catheters: five-year outcome 
analysis. J Vasc Access. 2014 Apr 25. doi:10.5301/jva.5000236.
Maya ID, et al. Does the heparin lock concentration affect hemodialysis catheter 
 patency? Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5:1458–1462.
Mermel LA, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
intravascular catheter-related infection: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49:1–45.
Mokrzycki MH, et al. A randomized trial of minidose warfarin for the prevention of  
late malfunction in tunneled, cuffed hemodialysis  catheters. Kidney Int. 2001;  
59:1935–1942.
Poole CV , et al. Treatment of catheter-related bacteremia with an antibiotic lock 
 protocol: effect of bacterial pathogen. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004;19:1237–1244.
Quaretti P , et al. A refinement of Hong’s technique for the removal of stuck dialysis 
catheters: an easy solution to a complex problem. J Vasc Access. 2014;15:183–188.
Rasmussen RL. The catheter-challenged patient and the need to recognize the recur -
rently dysfunctional tunneled dialysis catheter. Semin Dial. 2010;23:648–652.
Sabry AA, et al. The level of C-reactive protein in chronic hemodialysis patients: a 
comparative study between patients with noninfected catheters and arteriove -
nous fistula in two large Gulf hemodialysis centers. Hemodial Int. 2014 ;18:674–679.
Savader SJ, et al.  Treatment of hemodialysis catheter-associated fibrin sheaths by rt-PA 
infusion: critical analysis of 124 procedures. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2001;12:711–5.
Schiller B, et al. Spurious hyperphosphatemia in patients on hemodialysis with cath-
eters. Am J Kidney Dis. 2008;52:617–620.
Schilcher G, et al. Loss of antimicrobial effect of trisodium citrate due to ‘lock’ spillage 
from haemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014;29:914–919.
Sedlacek M, et al.  Aspirin treatment is associated with a significantly decreased risk of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia in hemodialysis patients with tunneled cath-
eters. Am J Kidney Dis. 2007;49:401–8.
Shanaah A, Brier M, Dwyer A. Fibrin sheath and its relation to subsequent events after 
tunneled dialysis catheter exchange. Semin Dial. 2013;26:733–737.
Sungur M, et al. Exit of catheter lock solutions from double lumen acute haemodialysis 
catheters—an in vitro study. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007;22:3533–3537.
Tordoir J, et al. EBPG on Vascular Access. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007;22 Suppl 2:  
ii88–117.
Vanholder R, et al. Catheter-related blood stream infections (CRBSI): a European view. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25:1753–1756.
Vercaigne LM, et al. Alteplase for blood flow restoration in hemodialysis catheters: a 
multicenter, randomized, prospective study comparing “dwell” versus “push” ad-
ministration. Clin Nephrol. 2012;78:287–296.
Wang AY, et al. Anticoagulant therapies for the prevention of intravascular cath-
eters malfunction in patients undergoing haemodialysis: systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28:  
2875–2888.
Yaseen O, et al. Comparison of alteplase (tissue plasminogen activator) high-dose vs. 
low-dose protocol in restoring hemodialysis catheter function: the ALTE-DOSE 
study. Hemodial Int. 2013;17:434–440.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch009.indd   171 09/10/14   1:08 am