172
 I. THE HEMODIALYSIS PRESCRIPTION.  All patients are different, and 
the circumstances eventuating in the need for acute hemodi -
alysis vary widely. The prescription for hemodialysis will change 
accordingly. As a teaching tool only, we present a “typical” 
 prescription for an acute hemodialysis in a 70-kg adult.
Rx: Acute hemodialysis (not for initial treatment)
Session length: Perform hemodialysis for 4 hours
Blood flow rate: 350 mL/min
Dialyzer: 
Dialyzer membrane: your choice
Dialyzer KUF: your choice
Dialyzer efficiency: usually a dialyzer with a K 0A of 800–1200 
is used
Dialysis solution composition (variable): 
Base: bicarbonate 25 mM
Sodium: 145 mM
Potassium: 3.5 mM
Calcium: 1.5 mM (3.0 mEq/L)
Magnesium: 0.375 mM (0.75 mEq/L)
Dextrose: 5.5 mM (100 mg/dL)
Phosphate: none
Dialysis solution flow rate: 500 mL/min
Dialysis solution temperature: 35°C–36°C
Fluid removal orders:
Remove 2.2 L over 4 hours at a constant rate
Anticoagulation orders:
See Chapter 14
A. Determining dialysis session length and blood flow rate.  The dialysis 
session length together with the blood flow rate is the most 
important determinant of the amount of dialysis to be given 
(dialyzer efficiency is also a factor).
1. Reduce the amount of dialysis for the initial one or two sessions. For
the initial treatment, especially when the predialysis serum 
urea nitrogen (SUN) level is very high (e.g., >125 mg/dL  
[44  mmol/L]), the dialysis session length and blood flow
rate should both be reduced. A urea reduction ratio of <40% 
should be targeted. This usually means using a blood flow
Acute Hemodialysis 
Prescription
Edward A. Ross, Allen R. Nissenson, 
and John T. Daugirdas
10
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   172 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 173
rate of only 200 mL/min (150 mL/min in small patients) for 
adults along with a 2-hour treatment time and a relatively 
low-efficiency hemofilter. A longer initial dialysis session 
or use of excessively high blood flow rates in the acute set -
ting may result in the so-called disequilibrium syndrome, 
described more fully in Chapter 12. This neurologic syn-
drome, which includes the appearance of obtundation, or 
even seizures and coma, during or after dialysis, has been 
associated with excessively rapid removal of blood solutes. 
The risk of disequilibrium syndrome is increased when the 
predialysis SUN level is high. After the initial dialysis ses-
sion, the patient can be reevaluated and should generally 
be dialyzed again the following day. The length of the sec-
ond dialysis session can usually be increased to 3 hours, 
provided that the predialysis SUN level is <100 mg/dL 
(36 mmol/L). Subsequent dialysis sessions can be as long 
as needed. The length of a single dialysis treatment rarely 
exceeds 6 hours unless the purpose of dialysis is treatment 
of drug overdose. Slow low-efficiency hemodialysis (SLED) 
uses low blood and dialysis solution flow rates and longer 
treatment sessions in order to more safely remove fluid. 
SLED is described in Chapter 15.
2. Dialysis frequency and dose for subsequent treatments and dialysis  
adequacy. I t is difficult to deliver a large amount of dialysis in 
the acute setting. Most intensive care unit patients are fluid 
overloaded, and urea distribution volume is often much 
greater than 50%–60% of body weight. True delivered blood 
flow rate through a venous catheter rarely exceeds 350 mL/
min and is often substantially lower. Recirculation occurs in 
venous catheters and is greatest with catheters in the femo-
ral position owing to the low pericatheter venous flow rate. 
Often, the treatment is interrupted owing  to hypotension. 
Furthermore, the degree of urea sequestration in muscle 
may be increased, as such patients are often on pressors, re-
ducing blood flow to muscle and skin, which contain a sub-
stantial portion of urea and other dissolved waste products. 
Concomitant intravenous infusions, which are  often given 
to patients in an acute setting, dilute the urea level in the 
blood and reduce further the efficiency of dialysis.
A typical 3- to 4-hour acute-dialysis session will deliver 
a single-pool Kt /V of only 0.9, with an equilibrated Kt /V of 
0.7. Dialysate-side urea removal may be even lower (Evan-
son, 1999). This low level of Kt /V, if given three times per 
week, is associated with a high mortality in chronic, stable 
patients. One option is to dialyze sick patients with acute 
renal failure on a daily (six or seven times per week) basis. 
Each treatment is then approximately 3–4 hours in length. 
Data by Schiffl (2002) suggest that mortality is reduced in 
patients with acute renal failure dialyzed six times per week 
as opposed to those receiving dialysis every other day. If 
every-other-day dialysis is to be given, the treatment length 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   173 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
174
should probably be set at 4–6 hours, to deliver a single-
pool Kt/V of at least 1.2–1.3, as recommended for chronic 
therapy. The VA/NIH (2008) study compared outcomes in 
acute patients dialyzed either 3 or 6 times per week and 
found absolutely no difference in outcomes. The intensity 
of dialysis in the 3-times-per-week group was substantially 
higher (Kt/V of 1.3 or more) than in the Schiffl article. For 
this reason, the KDIGO workgroup on acute kidney injury 
(2012) recommends that when attempting to maintain 
acute patients on a 3-times-per-week schedule, each treat -
ment should have a Kt /V of ≥1.3. When there is a concern 
that there is inconsistent dialysis delivery (e.g., catheter 
flow or hollow-fiber thrombosis problems), one can verify 
HD adequacy by assessing the URR using blood tests or 
devices that measure real-time solute clearance (ionic con-
ductance or UV-absorption technologies).
The amount of dialysis may need to be adjusted up-
ward in hypercatabolic patients. A low predialysis SUN 
level should not be used as a justification to reduce the 
amount of dialysis unless substantial residual renal urea 
clearance is documented; many acute renal failure patients 
tend to have decreased urea generation rates due to lack of 
protein ingestion and/or to impairment of urea synthesis 
by the liver. Therefore, in such patients a low SUN does not 
necessarily reflect low levels of other uremic toxins.
B. Choosing a dialyzer
1. Membrane material. A C ochrane report has suggested that no 
firm conclusions could be drawn as of 2006 regarding the 
benefits of any one group of modern dialysis membranes 
over another for acute or chronic dialysis. The best dialyzer 
to select for acute dialysis, therefore, remains unclear. No 
recommendation favoring use of high-flux membranes for 
acute dialysis can be made at this time, as membrane flux 
has not been studied as a separate factor in any random-
ized study of acute dialysis.
a. Anaphylactoid reactions.  T hese can occur and depend on 
both membrane material and sterilization mode. See 
Chapter 12 for details.
2. Ultrafiltration coefficient ( KUF). U ltrafiltration controllers are 
now available on all modern dialysis machines, and these 
accurately control the ultrafiltration rate by means of spe -
cial pumps and circuits. Machines with volumetric ultra-
filtration controllers are designed to use dialyzers of high 
water permeability (e.g., KUF > 6.0) and may lose accuracy if 
a high fluid removal rate is attempted using a dialyzer that 
is relatively impermeable to water.
In the unlikely event that a dialysis machine with an 
ultrafiltration controller is not available, then a membrane 
with a relatively low water permeability (KUF) should be cho-
sen so that the transmembrane pressure (TMP) will have to 
be set at a relatively high level to remove the amount of fluid 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   174 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 175
desired; then the inevitable errors in maintaining the  desired 
TMP will have less impact on the rate of fluid removal. When 
close monitoring of the fluid removal rate is required and a 
machine with advanced ultrafiltration control circuitry is 
not available, the fluid removal rate can be monitored by 
placing the patient on an electronic bed or chair scale and 
continuously following the weight during dialysis.
3. Dialyzer urea clearance.  F or the first couple of dialysis ses-
sions, it is best to avoid using very high-efficiency dialyzers, 
although these can be used as long as the blood flow is low. 
A dialyzer with an in vitro K0A urea of about 500–600 mL/
min is recommended for the initial session to minimize the 
risk of inadvertent overdialysis and of developing the dis-
equilibrium syndrome, although even with such lower ef-
ficiency dialyzers, a markedly shortened dialysis session is 
required to prevent overdialysis. When heparin-free dialy-
sis is used, there is less risk (theoretically) of clotting when 
a lower blood flow rate is used with a smaller dialyzer, as 
the blood velocity through a small fiber bundle will be 
higher. After the initial one or two sessions, particularly if 
a high blood flow rate is being used, normal-sized dialyzers 
can be chosen.
C. Choosing the dialysis solution.  I n our example, we have  chosen 
a bicarbonate level of 25 mM with a sodium level of 145 mM, 
a potassium level of 3.5 mM, a calcium level of 1.5 mM  
(3.0 mEq/L), a magnesium level of 0.375 mM (0.75 mEq/L), a 
dextrose level of 5.5 mM (100 mg/dL), and no phosphorus. De-
pending on the circumstances, this prescription may have to 
be altered in a given patient. It is important to recognize that 
for acute patients the dialysis solution composition should be 
tailored. The “standard” composition designed for acidotic, 
hyperphosphatemic, hyperkalemic, chronic dialysis patients 
is often inappropriate in an acute setting.
1. Dialysis solution bicarbonate concentration.  I n the sample pre-
scription mentioned earlier, we have chosen to use a 25 mM 
bicarbonate level. Intensive care unit patients are often  
relatively alkalotic for reasons described in what follows, 
and so prescriptions for “standard” bicarbonate dialysis 
 solution, containing 35–38 mM, should not be used with-
out first carefully evaluating the patient’s acid–base status.
If the predialysis plasma bicarbonate level is 28 mM 
or higher, or if the patient has respiratory alkalosis, a cus -
tom dialysis solution containing an appropriately lower 
 bicarbonate level (e.g., 20–28 mM, depending on the degree 
of alkalosis) should be used. One should remember that 
many dialysis solutions provide an additional 4–8 mEq/L 
of  bicarbonate-generating base from acetate or citrate as 
discussed in Chapter 5. In machines where the dialysate 
bicarbonate level can be adjusted by changing the propor -
tioning ratio between the acid and base concentrates, final 
dialysate bicarbonate levels shown on the display screen 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   175 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
176
often correspond to bicarbonate after mixing with the acid 
concentrate, and so the value shown may not incude the 
added base content coming from acetate or citrate. 
a. Dangers of metabolic alkalosis.  A dialysis patient with even
a mild metabolic alkalosis (e.g., plasma bicarbonate
level of 30 mmol/L) requires very little hyperventila-
tion to increase blood pH to dangerous levels. Alkalemia 
(blood pH > 7.50) may be more dangerous than acide-
mia. Dangers of alkalemia include soft tissue calcifica -
tion and cardiac arrhythmia (sometimes with sudden
death), 
 although documentation of the latter risk in the
 literature is not easy to find. Alkalemia has also been as -
sociated with such adverse symptoms as nausea, leth-
argy, and headache.
In dialysis patients, the most common causes of 
metabolic alkalosis are a reduced intake of protein, 
 intensive dialysis for any reason (e.g., daily dialysis), 
and vomiting or nasogastric suction. Another common 
cause is administered lactate or acetate with total par -
enteral nutrition (TPN) solutions, or citrate due to citrate 
 anticoagulation.
b. Predialysis respiratory alkalosis.  Many patients who are
candidates for acute dialysis have preexisting respira -
tory alkalosis. The causes of respiratory alkalosis are the 
same as in patients with normal renal function and in-
clude pulmonary disease (pneumonia, edema, embolus), 
hepatic failure, and central nervous system disorders.
Normally, compensation for respiratory alkalosis is two-
fold. There is an acute decrease in the plasma bicarbon-
ate level owing  to release of hydrogen ions from body
buffer stores. In patients with normal renal function,
there is a further delayed (2–3 days) compensatory fall
in the plasma bicarbonate level because of excretion of
bicarbonate in the urine. Renal bicarbonate excretion
obviously cannot occur in dialysis patients.
The therapeutic goal should always be to 
 normalize 
the pH rather than the plasma bicarbonate level. In patients 
with respiratory alkalosis, the plasma bicarbonate level at 
which the blood pH will be normal may be as low as 17–20 
mmol/L; the dialysis solution to use should contain less than 
the usual amount of bicarbonate to achieve a postdialysis 
plasma bicarbonate level in the desired subnormal range.
c. Achieving an appropriately low dialysis solution bicarbonate
level. In certain machines, the proportioning ratio of
concentrate to product water is fixed, and as a result, the
dialysis solution bicarbonate level can be reduced only by
changing the concentrate bicarbonate level. With such
machines, the bicarbonate cannot be reduced below about 
32 mM. In machines where the concentrate-to-product
water ratio can be changed, bicarbonate levels as low as
20 mM usually can be delivered, but not lower, and this
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   176 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 177
does not include the 4-8 mEq/L from acetate or citrate.  
When attempting to provide a low-base-content dialysate, 
sodium diacetate-containing concentrate should not be 
used, as this will increase the base content by 8 mEq/L.
d. Patients with severe predialysis acidosis
1. Dangers of excessive correction of metabolic acidosis.    
Excessive correction of severe metabolic acidosis 
(starting plasma bicarbonate level <10 mmol/L) can 
have adverse consequences, including lowering of the 
ionized calcium level and a paradoxical acidification 
of the cerebrospinal fluid and an increase in the tissue 
production rate of lactic acid. Initial therapy should 
aim for only partial correction of the plasma bicar -
bonate level; a target postdialysis plasma bicarbonate 
value of 15–20 mmol/L is generally appropriate; and 
for such severely acidotic patients, a dialysis solution 
bicarbonate level of 20–25 mM is normally used.
2. Respiratory acidosis.  T he normal compensation to 
 respiratory acidosis is an acute buffer response, 
which can increase the plasma bicarbonate level by 
2–4 mmol/L, followed by a delayed (3–4 days) increase 
in renal bicarbonate generation. Because the second 
response is obviated in dialysis patients, respiratory 
acidosis will have a more pronounced effect on blood 
pH than in patients with normal renal function. For 
such patients, dialysis solution bicarbonate levels 
should be at the higher range, targeted to keep their 
pH in the normal range.
2. Dialysis solution sodium level.  T he dialysis solution sodium 
level in the sample prescription is 145 mM. This level is 
generally acceptable for patients who have normal or 
slightly reduced predialysis serum sodium concentrations. 
If marked predialysis hypernatremia or hyponatremia is 
present, the dialysis solution sodium level will have to be 
adjusted accordingly.
a. Hyponatremia. H yponatremia is common in seriously ill 
patients requiring acute dialysis, primarily because such 
patients have often received large amounts of hyponat -
ric intravenous solutions with their medications and 
parenteral nutrition. Hyponatremia is frequently seen 
accompanying severe hyperglycemia in diabetic dialysis 
patients. For every increase of 100 mg/dL (5.5 mmol/L) 
in the serum glucose concentration, there is a corre-
sponding initial decrease of 1.6 mmol/L in the serum so-
dium concentration as a result of osmotic shift of water 
from the intracellular to the extracellular compartment. 
 Because osmotic diuresis secondary to the hyperglyce-
mia does not occur, the excess plasma water is not ex -
creted, and hyponatremia is maintained. Correction of 
hyperglycemia by insulin administration reverses the ini-
tial water shift and thereby corrects the hyponatremia.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   177 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
178
1. Predialysis serum sodium level .130 mmol/L. Intensive care 
patients often tend to be slightly hyponatremic, as
they often are given various intravenous drugs in 5%
dextrose and water.  The goal should be to keep serum 
sodium at or above 140 mmol/L, and dialysis 
 solution 
sodium should be in the range of 140-145  mM. The
 potential benefits of keeping dialysis solution  sodium 
<10 mM above the serum level in patients with pos-
sible brain edema and/or hypotension have been
 reviewed by Davenport (2008).
2. Predialysis serum sodium level , 130 mmol/L.  When the
degree of predialysis hyponatremia is moderate to
severe, and especially if the hyponatremia is of long
duration, it is  dangerous to achieve normonatremia
quickly. Rapid correction of hyponatremia has been
linked to a potentially fatal neurologic syndrome
known as osmotic demyelination syndrome  (Huang,
2007). The maximum safe rate of correction of the se-
rum sodium concentration in severely hyponatremic
patients is controversial  but probably is in the range
of 6-8 mmol/L per 24 hours. At this stage of incomplete 
knowledge, it seems prudent when treating patients
with severe hyponatremia to set the dialysis solution
sodium level as low as possible (with most machines
one can go no lower than 130 mM, although with the
Dialog Plus machine from B.Braun one can get down
to a dialysate sodium of ~123 mM), and to dialyze at
a slow (50-100 mL/min) blood flow rate, and for not
longer than 1 hour at a time, alternating with isolated
ultrafiltration as needed for volume control.  One can
check the serum sodium after each 30–60 min of dialy-
sis to ensure that the desired rate of sodium increase is 
not being exceeded. In one case report, use of a 50 mL/
min blood flow over 3 hours resulted in the desired
increase in the serum sodium of 6 mmol/L over the
3-hour dialysis period (Wendland and Kaplan, 2012).
Another approach is to delay dialysis for a few days if
possible and to treat hyponatremia with hypertonic
saline, removing excess fluid by isolated ultrafiltration 
as needed.  If continuous hemodialysis or hemofiltra-
tion is available, use of one of these modalities with
an 
 appropriate sodium-reduced dialysis solution/
replacement fluid is another good option and allows
for the greatest control of the rate of serum sodium in-
crease (Yessayan, 2014). 
b. Hypernatremia. Hypernatremia is less common than hy -
ponatremia in a hemodialysis setting but does occur,
usually in a context of dehydration, osmotic diuresis, and 
failure to give sufficient electrolyte-free water. It is some-
what dangerous to attempt to correct hypernatremia by
hemodialyzing against a low-sodium dialysis solution.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   178 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 179
Whenever the dialysis solution sodium level is more 
than 3–5 mM lower than the plasma value, three compli-
cations of dialysis occur with increased incidence:
1. Osmotic contraction of the plasma volume occurs as
water shifts from the dialyzed blood (containing less
sodium than before) to the relatively hyperosmotic in-
terstitium, causing hypotension.
2. The propensity to develop muscle cramps is increased.
3. Water from the dialyzed, relatively hyponatremic
blood enters cells, causing cerebral edema and exac -
erbating the disequilibrium syndrome.
The risk of disequilibrium syndrome is the most im-
portant one; use of low-sodium dialysis solution should 
certainly be avoided in situations in which the predialysis 
SUN level is high (e.g., > 100 mg/dL [36 mmol/L]). The 
safest approach is to first dialyze a patient with a dialysis 
solution sodium level close to that of plasma and then 
correct the hypernatremia by slow administration of 
slightly hyponatric fluids.
3. Dialysis solution potassium level.  The usual dialysis solution
potassium concentration for acute dialysis ranges from
2.0 to 4.5 mM. An important number of patients requiring
acute dialysis will have a plasma potassium value in the
normal or even the subnormal range, especially in patients 
with nonoliguric acute renal failure and in oliguric patients 
if food intake is poor. Hypokalemia is also a complication
of TPN. Correction of severe acidosis during dialysis causes 
a shift of potassium into cells, lowering the plasma potas-
sium level further. Hypokalemia and arrhythmia can result.
When the predialysis serum potassium level is 
<4.5 mmol/L, the dialysis solution potassium level can  be 
≥4.0 mM, with special caution needed in cardiac patients 
prone to arrhythmias. In patients with a predialysis plasma 
potassium level >5.5 mmol/L, a dialysis solution potas-
sium level of 2.0 is usually appropriate in stable patients, 
but the dialysis solution potassium concentration should 
be raised to 2.5 to 3.5 in patients at risk for arrhythmia or 
in those receiving digitalis. If the potassium level is >7.0, 
some nephrologists will use a dialysis solution potassium 
level below 2.0 mM. However, the plasma potassium level 
must be monitored hourly, and there is considerable dan-
ger of precipitating arrhythmia if the plasma potassium 
concentration is lowered too rapidly.
a. Potassium rebound. There is a marked rebound increase in 
the serum potassium level within 1–2 hours after dialy-
sis. One should resist the temptation to treat a postdi-
alysis hypokalemia with potassium supplements unless
there are extenuating circumstances.
b. Acute hyperkalemia.  Patients with very severe hyperkale -
mia present with alterations on the electrocardiogram
(low P waves, peaked T waves, widening of the QRS,
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   179 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
180
cardiac standstill), along with weakness and lethargy. 
Such patients should be treated immediately with in-
travenous infusion of calcium chloride or calcium glu-
conate and/or intravenous glucose plus insulin while 
arrangements for emergency hemodialysis are being 
made. The response to intravenous sodium bicarbonate 
in dialysis patients is suboptimal. Another therapy is in -
travenous or inhaled albuterol.
c. Subacute hyperkalemia.  Initial treatment should always
be a careful review of the diet for high-potassium foods.
The majority of patients respond to reduced alimentary
potassium intake. If this fails, then oral administration
of a sodium–potassium exchange resin (e.g., sodium
polystyrene sulfonate) can be tried. The resin usually
is given orally with sorbitol to prevent constipation, or
mixed with sorbitol as an enema. However, several re-
ports of intestinal necrosis associated with sorbitol and
oral sodium polystyrene sulfonate have been published
(e.g., Gardiner, 1997). New, potentially safer and more ef-
fective gastrointestinal potassium binders, such as ZS-9
(ZS Pharma, Inc., Coppell, TX) and Patiromer (Relypsa,
Redwood City, CA) are undergoing clinical trials.
d. Potassium removal and dialysis solution glucose.  Potassium
removal during dialysis using glucose-free dialysis solu-
tion may be 30% greater than potassium removal using
a 200 mg/dL (11 mmol/L) glucose solution because with 
glucose-free dialysis solution there may be decreased in-
tradialytic translocation of potassium into cells (Ward,
1987). Use of a dialysis solution containing 100 mg/dL
(5.5 mmol/L) glucose may be the best option, and this
concentration is becoming the industry standard.
4. Dialysis solution calcium levels.  Our generally recommended  
level for acute dialysis is 1.5–1.75 mM (3.0–3.5 mEq/L).
There is some evidence that dialysis solution calcium lev-
els <1.5 mM (3.0 mEq/L) predispose to hypotension during 
dialysis (van der Sande, 1998). In patients with predialysis
hypocalcemia, unless a sufficiently high dialysis solution
calcium level is used, correction of acidosis can result in
further lowering of the ionized plasma calcium level (with
possible precipitation of seizures). One study showed
that QTc dispersion increased (potentially promoting ar -
rhythmias) when a low calcium dialysis solution was used
(Nappi, 2000). Routine use of 1.25 mM (2.5 mEq/L) calcium 
dialysis solution (now standard for treatment of chronic
dialysis patients taking calcium-containing phosphorus
binders) to treat patients with acute renal injury is not un-
common, however, and there is little hard evidence to show 
that such a practice is harmful.
a. Dialytic treatment of acute hypercalcemia.  Hemodialysis can
be effective in lowering the serum calcium concentra-
tion in hypercalcemic patients. In most commercially
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   180 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 181
prepared hemodialysis solutions, the calcium concentra-
tion ranges from 1.25 to 1.75 mM (2.5–3.5 mEq/L). Under 
most circumstances, w e prefer to add at least 1.25 mM 
(2.5 mEq/L) calcium to the hemodialysis solution to 
minimize the possibility of an overly rapid decrease in 
the serum ionized calcium (which can cause tetany or 
seizures). Frequent measurement of the serum ionized 
calcium concentration and physical examination of the 
patient should be performed during dialysis to avoid 
these complications.
5. Dialysis solution magnesium levels.  The usual dialysis
 solution magnesium  level ranges from 0.25 to 0.75 mM  
(0.5–1.5 mEq/L). Magnesium is a vasodilator, and in acute di-
alysis, one preliminary report suggests that blood pressure is 
better maintained when a dialysis solution magnesium level
of 0.375 mM (0.75 mEq/L) was used versus a  dialysis solu-
tion containing 0.75 mM (1.5 mEq/L) magnesium (Roy and
Danziger, 1996). In another article (Kyriazis, 2004), a low di-
alysate magnesium level of 0.25 mM (0.50 mEq/L) was asso-
ciated with intradialytic hypotension, especially when a low
dialysate calcium was also used. So the best dialysis solution 
magnesium level to use for acute dialysis in terms of blood
pressure maintenance remains unknown.
a. Hypomagnesemia. Hypomagnesemia occurs in malnour -
ished dialysis patients and in dialysis patients receiving 
TPN ( owing to shifting of magnesium into cells dur -
ing anabolism). Hypomagnesemia can cause cardiac
arrhythmia and can impair the release and action of
parathyroid hormone. Cautious supplementation (e.g.,
orally, intravenously) or increasing the concentration in 
the dialysate may be needed. Serum magnesium values
should be carefully monitored in dialysis patients dur -
ing TPN, and TPN fluids should be supplemented rou-
tinely with magnesium unless the serum magnesium
level is high.
b. Hypermagnesemia. Hypermagnesemia is usually caused
by accidental or covert use of magnesium-containing
laxatives, enemas, or antacids. Manifestations of hy-
permagnesemia include hypotension, weakness, and
bradyarrhythmias. Treatment is cessation of ingestion of 
magnesium-containing compounds. Hemodialysis also
is effective in lowering the serum magnesium level.
6. Dialysis solution dextrose level.  Dialysis solution for acute
dialysis should always contain dextrose (100–200 mg/dL;
5.5–11 mmol/L). Septic patients, diabetics, and patients
receiving beta-blockers are at risk of developing severe
hypoglycemia during dialysis. Addition of dextrose to the
dialysis solution reduces the risk of hypoglycemia and may 
also result in a lower incidence of dialysis-related side ef-
fects. The interaction between dialysis solution glucose
and potassium has already been discussed.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   181 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
182
7. Dialysis solution phosphate levels.  P hosphate is normally 
absent from the dialysis solution, and justifiably so, as 
patients in renal failure typically have elevated serum phos-
phate values. Use of a large-surface-area dialyzer and pro-
vision of a longer dialysis session increase the amount of 
phosphate removed during dialysis.
a. Hypophosphatemia. M alnourished patients and patients 
receiving hyperalimentation may have low or low-  
normal predialysis serum phosphate levels. Predialysis 
hypophosphatemia may also be present in patients  being 
intensively dialyzed for any purpose. In such  patients, 
hypophosphatemia can be aggravated by  dialysis against 
a zero-phosphate bath. Severe hypophosphatemia can 
cause respiratory muscle weakness and alterations in he-
moglobin oxygen affinity. This can lead to respiratory ar-
rest during dialysis. For patients at risk, phosphate can be 
added to the dialysis solution. Alternatively, phosphate 
can be given intravenously, although this must be done 
carefully to avoid overcorrection and hypocalcemia. 
Rapid correction of hypophosphatemia with intravenous 
phosphate has been associated with acute kidney injury 
(AKI). In one study, administration of 20 mmol over an 
average of 310 minutes was deemed generally safe, but 
was associated with a fall in ionized calcium in some 
patients, suggesting that a slower rate of replacement 
might be desirable (Agarwal, 2014).
b. Adding phosphorus to bicarbonate-containing dialysis solu -
tions. F or prevention of hypophosphatemia, the phospho -
rus concentration in the final dialysis solution should be 
about 1.3 mmol/L (4 mg/dL). Phosphorus cannot be added 
to concentrate for acetate-containing dialysis solutions 
because of Ca–Mg–PO 4 solubility problems. Phospho-
rus designed for IV use can be added to the  bicarbonate 
component of the concentrate, which does not contain 
calcium or magnesium (Hussain, 2005). An alternative 
approach is to add sodium phosphate-containing enema 
preparations to either the bicarbonate or acid concen-
trate, as described in Chapter 16.  The amount added can 
be set to achieve a final dialysis solution phosphorus con-
centration of 1.3 mM (4.0 mg/dL); however, this practice is 
not Food and Drug Administration-approved.
Of practical importance, adding phosphate or other 
supplements may be technically difficult or not feasible 
in facilities that rely on the dialysis machine to auto-
matically mix the base solution from dry bicarbonate 
reagent.
D. Choosing the dialysis solution flow rates.  F or acute dialysis, the 
usual dialysis solution flow rate is 500 mL/min.
E. Dialysis solution temperature.  T his is usually 35°C–37°C. The 
lower range should be used in hypotension-prone patients 
(see Chapter 12).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   182 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 183
F. Ultrafiltration orders.  Fluid removal needs can range from 0 to  
5 kg per dialysis session.
1. Guidelines for ultrafiltration orders.  Some guidelines to gauge
the total amount of fluid that needs to be removed are as
follows:
a. Even patients who are quite edematous and in pulmo-
nary edema rarely need removal of more than 4 L of fluid 
during the initial session. Remaining excess fluid is best
removed during a second session the following day.
b. If the patient does not have pedal edema or anasarca,
in the absence of pulmonary congestion, it is unusual to
need to remove greater than 2–3 L over the dialysis ses-
sion. In fact, the fluid removal requirement may be zero
in patients with little or no jugular venous distention.
Fluid removal rates of 10 mL/kg per hour are usually well 
tolerated in volume overloaded patients.
c. The fluid removal plan during dialysis should take into
account the 0.2 L that the patient will receive at the end
of dialysis in the form of saline to rinse the dialyzer and
any other fluid ingested or administered during the he -
modialysis session.
d. As already noted, if it is the initial dialysis, the length of
the dialysis session should be limited to 2 hours. However, 
if a large amount of fluid (e.g., 4.0 L) must be removed, it 
is impractical and dangerous to remove such an amount 
over a 2-hour period. In such instances, the dialysis solu-
tion flow can initially be shut off, and isolated ultrafil-
tration (see Chapter 15) can be performed for 1–2 hours, 
removing 2–3 kg of fluid. Immediately thereafter, dialysis 
can be performed for 2 hours, removing the remainder
of the desired fluid volume. (If severe electrolyte abnor -
malities, such as hyperkalemia, are present, dialysis may 
have to be performed prior to isolated ultrafiltration.)
e. In general, it is best to remove fluid at a constant rate
throughout the dialysis treatment. If the dialysis solution 
sodium level has been set lower than the plasma value
(e.g., in the treatment of hypernatremia), the ultrafiltra-
tion rate can initially be reduced to compensate for the
osmotic contraction of blood volume that will occur as
the plasma sodium concentration is being lowered.
In patients with acute renal failure, it is extremely 
important to avoid hypotension at all times, including 
during dialysis. In a rat model of acute renal failure, Kelle-
her (1987) showed that the renal autoregulatory response 
to systemic hypotension is greatly impaired. They found 
that transient episodes of hypotension caused by blood 
withdrawal caused further renal damage and delay of 
functional renal recovery.
2. Impact of dialysis frequency on ultrafiltration needs.  It is difficult
in an acute setting to limit a patient’s fluid gain to <2 L
per day. Often 3 L per day is absorbed in patients receiving
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   183 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
184
parenteral nutrition. Use of a frequent (4-7 times per week) 
dialysis schedule reduces the amount of fluid that needs to 
be removed with each dialysis, thereby lowering the risk of 
intradialytic hypotension and further ischemic damage to 
an already impaired set of kidneys. An alternative way to 
remove fluid relatively asymptomatically is to use SLED, a 
procedure described in Chapter 15.
 II. HEMODIALYSIS PROCEDURE
A. Rinsing and priming the dialyzer (single-use setting).  Thorough 
 rinsing of the dialyzer is important because it may reduce the 
incidence or severity of anaphylactic dialyzer reactions by vir-
tue of removal of leachable allergens (e.g., ethylene oxide in 
ethylene oxide–sterilized dialyzers).
B. Obtaining vascular access
1. Percutaneous venous cannula. C lot or residual heparin is first 
aspirated from each catheter lumen. Patency of the cath -
eter lumina is checked by irrigating with a saline-filled sy-
ringe. For acute dialysis, heparin-free dialysis is becoming 
more popular and is routinely used in some centers. If hep-
arin is to be used, the heparin loading dose is administered 
into the venous catheter port and is flushed in with saline. 
After 3 minutes (to allow heparin to mix with the blood), 
blood flow is initiated.
2. Arteriovenous (AV) fistula (see also Chapter 6).  Both needles 
are placed in the vein downstream to the anastomosis. 
Flow through the venous limb is distal to proximal; hence, 
the arterial needle is placed distally. Some tips regarding 
needle placement are as follows:
a. In a patient with a poorly distended venous limb, brief 
application of a tourniquet may be helpful in defining its 
location. This tourniquet should be removed during di-
alysis, as its presence will encourage recirculation.
b. Choice of optimum needle size is discussed in Chapter 6. 
Larger needle sizes can be used when higher blood flow 
rates are desired.
c. Prepare the needle insertion sites with chlorhexidine or 
other suitable disinfectant.
d. Arterial needle. I nsert it first, at least 3 cm away from the 
site of the AV anastomosis. The needle should be inserted 
bevel up, pointing either upstream or downstream.
e. V enous needle.  I nsert bevel up, pointing downstream 
(usually this will be toward the heart). The insertion 
point customarily is inserted at least 3–5 cm downstream 
to the arterial needle to minimize entry of dialyzed blood 
into the arterial needle (recirculation), although one 
study suggests that closer needle placement does not re-
sult in recirculation (see Chapter 6).
f. Angle of needle insertion.  This depends on the depth of 
the access from the surface of the skin, and usually is 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   184 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 185
 20-35 degrees for AV fistulas, and 45 degrees for AV grafts 
(Brouwer, 1995).
3. AV graft.  The anatomy of the graft should be known and
preferably diagrammed in the patient’s chart. The guide -
lines for placing needles are the same as for the AV fistula. 
Use of a tourniquet is never necessary.
After the needles have been placed, if heparin is to 
be used, the heparin loading dose is given into the venous 
needle and flushed in with saline. After 3 minutes, flow 
through the blood circuit is initiated.
C. Initiating dialysis. The blood flow rate is initially set at 50 mL/
min, then 100 mL/min, until the entire blood circuit fills with 
blood. As the blood circuit fills, the priming fluid in the dia-
lyzer and tubing can either be given to the patient or disposed 
of to drain. In the latter instance, the venous blood line is kept 
to drain until the blood column passes through the dialyzer 
and reaches the venous air trap. In unstable patients, the 
priming fluid is usually administered to the patient to help 
maintain the blood volume.
After the circuit is filled with blood and proper blood levels 
in the venous drip chamber are ensured, the blood flow rate 
should be increased promptly to the desired level. The pressure 
levels at the inflow (arterial) monitor, between the access site 
and the blood pump, and of the outflow (venous) monitor, be-
tween the dialyzer and the venous air trap, are noted, and the 
pressure limits are set slightly above and below the operating 
pressure to maximize the probability that the blood pump will 
stop and alarms will sound in the event of a line separation. If 
a line separation does occur, the pressure in the blood line will 
rapidly approach zero. As it does, it should trigger a properly 
set pressure limit switch. The lower pressure limit on the ve-
nous pressure gauge should be set within 10–20 mm Hg of the 
operating pressure; a larger gap can cause failure of the alarms 
to trigger with line separation. Unfortunately, even properly set 
venous pressure limits may not stop the pump if the venous 
needle dislodges or if there is a line separation.  This issue is dis-
cussed in more detail in Chapter 4.  For this reason, connections 
to the access should always be securely taped and kept visible 
to caregivers at all times (Van Waeleghem, 2008; 
 Ribitsch, 2013).
The dialysis solution flow can now be initiated. In ma -
chines with an ultrafiltration controller, the desired fluid re -
moval rate is simply dialed in.
D. Beeps, buzzers, and alarms. As introduced in Chapter 4, the mon-
itors on the dialysis solution machine include the following:
Blood Circuit Dialysis Solution Circuit
Inflow pressure Conductivity
Outflow pressure Temperature
Air detector Hemoglobin
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   185 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
186
1. Blood circuit (see Fig. 4.1)
a. Inflow (prepump) pressure monitor.  Usually, the inflow pres-
sure (proximal to the blood pump) is −80 to −200 mm
Hg, with −250 mm Hg being considered the usual limit
beyond which one does not go.
If the access is not providing sufficient blood to the 
pump, the suction proximal to the blood pump will increase, 
and the alarm will sound, shutting off the blood pump.
1. Causes of excessive inflow suction
a. Venous catheter access.  Usually improper tip posi -
tion or ball-valve thrombus or fibrin plug at the
catheter tip.
b. AV access
i. Improperly positioned arterial needle (needle
not in vessel or up against vessel wall)
ii. Decrease in the patient’s blood pressure (and
hence flow through the access)
iii. Spasm of the access vessel (AV fistula only)
iv. Stenosis of the arterial anastomosis of an AV
graft  or fistula
v. Clotting of the arterial needle or of the access
vi. Kinking of the arterial line
 vii. Collapse of the access due to elevation of the
arm (if this is suspected, sit the patient up, blood 
pressure permitting, until the access site is be-
low heart level)
 viii. Use of too small a needle for the blood flow rate
being used
2. Management
a. Venous catheter. Check lines for kinking. Sometimes, 
changing arm or neck position or moving the cath-
eter slightly makes the catheter work. Reversing the 
catheter ports is another maneuver that sometimes 
works. If these initial steps do not work, subsequent 
steps include urokinase or tissue plasminogen acti-
vator infusion, checking catheter position in the ra-
diology suite, or fibrin sleeve stripping as described 
in Chapter 9.
b. AV access
i. Reduce blood flow rate to the point that inflow
suction decreases and the alarm stays off.
ii. Verify that the patient’s blood pressure is not un-
usually low. If the pressure is low, correct it by
administering fluid or reducing the ultrafiltra -
tion rate.
iii. If a patient’s pressure is not unusually low, un-
tape the arterial needle, move it up or down
slightly, or rotate it.
iv. Turn up blood flow rate to previous level. If in-
flow suction remains excessive, repeat step (iii).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   186 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 187
v. If improvement is not obtained, continue dialy -
sis for a longer time at a lower blood flow rate, or 
place a second arterial needle (leaving the origi-
nal, flushed with heparinized saline, in place un-
til the end of dialysis), and dialyze through the
second needle.
vi. If excessive inflow suction persists despite nee-
dle change, the inflow to the vascular access
may be stenosed. Occlude the access between
the arterial and venous needles by transient
pressure with two fingers. If the negative pres-
sure at the prepump monitor increases mark -
edly when the intraneedle segment is occluded,
this is a sign that some of the inflow was com-
ing from the downstream access limb and that
blood flow through the upstream limb of the ac-
cess is inadequate.
b. Outflow (venous) pressure monitor. Usually, the pressure here 
is +50 to +250 mm Hg, depending on needle size, blood 
flow rate, and hematocrit.
1. Causes of high venous pressure
a. The pressure may be as high as 200 mm Hg when
using an AV graft because the high arterial pressure 
in the graft is often transmitted to the venous line
b. High blood flow rate when using a relatively small
(16G) venous needle
c. Clotting in the venous blood line filter if one is be-
ing used. Clotting of the filter may be the first sign of 
inadequate heparinization and of incipient clotting 
of the entire dialyzer
d. Stenosis (or spasm) at the venous limb of the vascu-
lar access
e. Improperly positioned venous needle or kinked ve-
nous line
f. Clotting of the venous needle or venous limb of the
vascular access
2. Management of high venous pressure
a. If clotting of the venous blood line filter is at fault,
the dialyzer should be rinsed with saline (by open-
ing up the saline infusion line and briefly clamping
the blood inlet line proximal to the saline infusion
port). If the dialyzer is not clotted ( fibers appear
clear on saline rinse), then a new venous line can be 
rapidly primed with saline and substituted for the
partially clotted line, and dialysis can be resumed
after adjusting the heparin dose.
b. The presence or absence of obstruction at the ve-
nous needle or in the venous limb of the access can 
be assessed by shutting off the blood pump, quickly 
clamping the venous blood line, disconnecting the
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   187 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
188
venous blood line from the venous needle, and ir -
rigating through the venous needle with saline and 
noting the amount of resistance.
c. Occlude the access between the arterial and venous 
needles by pressing down gently with two fingers. 
If stenosis downstream is causing outflow obstruc -
tion through the vascular access, the positive pres-
sure measured at the venous monitor will increase 
further when the upstream access is occluded.
c. Air detector. T he danger of inadvertent air entry is great -
est between the vascular access site and the blood 
pump, where the pressure is negative. Common sites of 
air entry include the region around the arterial needle 
(especially if the inflow suction is very high), via leaky 
tubing connections, via broken blood tubing as it passes 
through the roller pump, or via the saline infusion set. 
Air can also enter the patient if air return is improperly 
performed at the end of dialysis. Many air emboli occur 
after the air detector has been turned off because of false 
alarms. This practice should be avoided. Air embolism 
can be fatal.
The creation of microbubbles during dialysis and 
their potential adverse effects is discussed in Chapter 4.
d. Blood line kinking and hemolysis.  Se vere hemolysis may 
occur because of kinking of the blood line between the 
pump and the  dialyzer. This is a relatively common 
cause of dialysis machine/blood line malfunction caus-
ing patient injury. Blood lines configured for prepump 
pressure monitoring will not alarm if high pressures are 
encountered in the postpump segment between pump 
and dialyzer. Even if a blood line with a postpump pres-
sure monitor is being used, if the kink is upstream to the 
origin of the pressure monitoring line, high pressure due 
to the kink will not be detected.
2. Dialysis solution circuit monitors.  T he dangers of dialyzing 
against an excessively concentrated, dilute, or hot dialysis 
solution have been discussed in Chapter 4.
a. Conductivity. T he most common cause of increased di-
alysis solution conductivity is either a kink in the tubing 
routing purified water to the dialysis machine, or low 
water pressure, resulting in insufficient water delivery to 
the machine. The most common cause of a reduced con-
ductivity is an empty concentrate bottle. Otherwise, the 
cause is usually in the proportioning pump. The dialysis 
solution bypass valve is activated as soon as conductivity 
deviates from the specified limits, diverting the abnor -
mal dialysis solution away from the dialyzer to the drain.
b. T emperature.  A bnormal temperature is usually caused by 
some malfunction in the heating circuit that warms the 
dialysate. Again, a properly functioning bypass valve pro-
tects the patient.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   188 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 189
c. Hemoglobin (blood leak).  F alse alarms may be due to the 
presence of air bubbles in the dialysis solution, to dialy-
sate bilirubin in jaundiced patients, or to a dirty sensor. 
The dialysate may not appear to be discolored to the na-
ked eye. A blood leak alarm should be confirmed by test-
ing the effluent dialysate with a test strip of the sort used 
for detecting hemoglobin in the urine.
If a leak is confirmed, blood should be returned and 
dialysis discontinued.
E. Patient monitoring and complications. T he patient’s blood pressure 
should be monitored as often as necessary, but at least every 
15 minutes for an acute dialysis in an unstable patient. The 
manifestations and treatment of hypotension and other com -
plications during dialysis are discussed in Chapter 12.
F. T ermination of dialysis.  T he blood in the extracorporeal circuit 
can be returned using either saline or air. If saline is used, the 
patient usually receives 100–300 mL of this fluid during the 
rinse-back procedure, nullifying the corresponding amount of 
fluid removed by ultrafiltration. However, if the patient’s blood 
pressure is low at the end of dialysis, the saline bolus will help 
to raise the blood pressure quickly. When air is used, the blood 
pump is first shut off, and the arterial blood line is clamped 
close to the patient. The arterial blood line is then discon-
nected just distal to the clamp, opening it to air. The blood 
pump is restarted at a reduced rate (20–50 mL/min), and the 
air is allowed to displace the blood in the dialyzer. When the 
air reaches the venous air trap, or when air bubbles are first 
seen in the venous blood line, the venous line is clamped, the 
blood pump shut off, and the return procedure terminated. 
Use of air to return the blood increases the risk of air embo-
lism, and the termination procedure should be extremely 
carefully supervised when air return is employed.
G. Postdialysis evaluation
1. Weight loss.  T he patient should be weighed after dialysis 
whenever possible, and the postdialysis weight compared 
with the predialysis weight. It is not uncommon for the 
weight loss to be greater or less than that anticipated on 
the basis of the calculated ultrafiltration rate. Given the 
high accuracy of the volumetric ultrafiltration  controllers 
in modern HD machines, unpredicted pre-to-post weight 
changes are usually due to the failure to take into account 
fluid administered to the patient during dialysis in the form 
of saline, medications, hyperalimentation, or oral fluid 
ingestion.
2. Postdialysis blood values.  B lood can be sampled promptly 
after dialysis to confirm the adequacy of urea nitrogen 
removal and correction of acidosis. For urea nitrogen, 
sodium, and calcium, the postdialysis specimen can be 
drawn 20–30 seconds to 2 minutes after dialysis, although 
a postdialysis increase in the plasma urea level of 10%–20% 
usually occurs within 30 minutes due to reequilibration of 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   189 09/10/14   1:08 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
190
urea between various body compartments. The method of 
obtaining the postdialysis blood sample is quite important; 
if access recirculation is present, contamination of the inlet 
blood sample with dialyzed outlet blood can occur, yielding 
erroneously low plasma urea nitrogen values. The timing of 
the sampling is critically important in that it can help dis -
cern access recirculation, cardiopulmonary recirculation, 
and intercompartmental rebound effects. Reliable meth-
ods of obtaining the postdialysis sample are described in 
Chapters 3 and 11.
a. Urea nitrogen. The methods described in Chapters 3 and
11 can be used to estimate a predicted Kt /V and urea re-
duction ratio. If the plasma urea nitrogen value has fallen 
to a lesser extent, possible causes include partial clotting 
of the dialyzer, an error in setting of the blood flow rate,
and recirculation at the vascular access site. Online ma-
chine methods of monitoring in vivo dialyzer clearance
(ionic conductance) and Kt/V (ultraviolet absorbance of
the spent dialysate) are described in Chapter 11.
b. Potassium. The change in the plasma potassium level as
a result of dialysis is difficult to predict because of con-
comitant shifting of potassium into cells due to correc -
tion of acidosis or to cellular uptake of glucose. In acute
patients, it is best to sample blood for potassium at least 
1 hour after the end of dialysis.
References and Suggested Readings
Agarwal B, et al. Is parenteral phosphate replacement in the intensive care unit safe? 
Ther Apher Dial. 2014;18:31–36.
Brouwer DJ.  Cannulation camp: basic needle cannulation training for dialysis staff.  
Dial Transplant. 1995;24:1-7.
Casino FG, Marshall MR. Simple and accurate quantification of dialysis in acute renal 
failure patients during either urea non-steady state or treatment with irregular or 
continuous schedules. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004;19:1454–1466.
Davenport A. Practical guidance for dialyzing a hemodialysis patient following acute 
brain injury. Hemodial Int. 2008;12:307–312.
Emmett M, et al. Effect of three laxatives and a cation exchange resin on fecal sodium 
and potassium excretion. Gastroenterology. 1995;108:752–760.
Evanson JA, et al. Measurement of the delivery of dialysis in acute renal failure. Kidney 
Int. 1999;55:1501–1508.
Gardiner GW . Kayexalate (sodium polystyrene sulphonate) in sorbitol associated with 
intestinal necrosis in uremic patients. Can J Gastroenterol. 1997;11:573–577.
Herrero JA, et al. Pulmonary diffusion capacity in chronic dialysis patients. Respir Med. 
2002;96:487–492.
Huang WY, et al. Central pontine and extrapontine myelinolysis after rapid correc-
tion of hyponatremia by hemodialysis in a uremic patient. Ren Fail. 2007;29:635-8.
Hussain S, et al. Phosphorus-enriched hemodialysis during pregnancy: two case 
 reports. Hemodial Int. 2005;9:147–150.
Jörres A, et al; and the ad-hoc working group of ERBP . A European Renal Best Practice 
(ERBP) position statement on the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes 
(KDIGO) Clinical Practice Guidelines on Acute Kidney Injury: part 2: renal replace-
ment therapy. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28:2940–2945.
Kanagasundaram NS, et al; for the Project for the Improvement of the Care of Acute 
Renal Dysfunction (PICARD) Study Group. Prescribing an equilibrated inter -
mittent hemodialysis dose in intensive care unit acute renal failure. Kidney Int. 
2003;64:2298–2310.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   190 09/10/14   1:08 am
Chapter 10 / Acute Hemodialysis Prescription 191
KDIGO. KDIGO clinical practice guidelines for acute kidney injury. Kidney Int. 
2012;2(suppl 1):1–141.
Kelleher SP , et al. Effect of hemorrhagic reduction in blood pressure on recovery from 
acute renal failure. Kidney Int. 1987;31:725.
Ketchersid TL, Van Stone JC. Dialysate potassium. Semin Dial. 1991;4:46.
Kyriazis J, et al. Dialysate magnesium level and blood pressure. Kidney Int. 
2004;66:1221–1231.
MacLeod AM, et al. Cellulose, modified cellulose and synthetic membranes in the hae-
modialysis of patients with end-stage renal disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2005;(3):CD003234.
Madias NE, Levey AS. Metabolic alkalosis due to absorption of “nonabsorbable” ant -
acids. Am J Med. 1983;74:155–158.
Nappi SE, et al. QTc dispersion increases during hemodialysis with low-calcium dialy-
sate. Kidney Int. 2000;57:2117–2122.
Palevsky PM, et al. KDOQI US commentary on the 2012 KDIGO clinical practice guide-
line for acute kidney injury. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;61:649–672.
Ribitsch W , et al. Prevalence of detectable venous pressure drops expected with venous 
needle dislodgement. Semin Dial. 2013 Dec 17. doi:10.1111/sdi.12169.
Roy PS, Danziger RS. Dialysate magnesium concentration predicts the occurrence of 
intradialytic hypotension [Abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1996;7:1496.
Schiffl H, Lang SM, Fischer R. Daily hemodialysis and the outcome of acute renal fail-
ure. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:305–310.
Subramanian S, Venkataraman R, Kellum JA. Related articles, links influence of dialy-
sis membranes on outcomes in acute renal failure: a meta-analysis. Kidney Int. 
2002;62:1819–1823.
Sweet SJ, et al. Hemolytic reactions mechanically induced by kinked hemodialysis 
lines. Am J Kidney Dis. 1996;27:262–266.
van der Sande FM, et al. Effect of dialysate calcium concentrations in intradia-
lytic blood pressure course in cardiac-compromised patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 
1998;32:125–131.
Van Waeleghem JP , et al. Venous needle dislodgement: how to minimise the risks.  
J Ren Care. 2008;34:163–168.
VA/NIH Acute Renal Failure Trial Network, Palevsky PM, et al. Intensity of renal sup-
port in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:7–20.
Ward RA, et al. Hemodialysate composition and intradialytic metabolic, acid–base and 
potassium changes. Kidney Int. 1987;32:129.
Wendland EM, Kaplan AA. A proposed approach to the dialysis prescription in severely 
hyponatremic patients with end-stage renal disease. Semin Dial. 2012;25:82-5.
Yessayan L, et al.  Treatment of severe hyponatremia in patients with kidney failure: 
Role of continuous venovenous hemofiltration with low sodium replacement fluid.  
Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;64:305-310.
Web References
Acute dialysis—recent articles and abstracts. http://www.hdcn.com/ddacut.htm.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch010.indd   191 09/10/14   1:08 am