192
Chronic Hemodialysis 
Prescription
John T. Daugirdas
Please review Chapter 3 at this time. Many concepts developed in 
Chapter 3 will be only briefly touched on here.
 I. UREA AS A MARKER SOLUTE. Although uremic toxicity is due to both 
small- and large-molecular-weight solutes, small toxins appear to 
be of greater importance. For this reason (and there are practical, 
laboratory measurement issues as well), the amount of dialysis 
prescribed is based on removal of urea, which has a molecular 
weight of 60 Da. Urea is only slightly toxic per se, and so its plasma 
level is only reflecting concentrations of other, presumably more 
harmful, uremic toxins.
A. Urea removal versus serum level . Both removal and serum level 
should be monitored when checking dialysis adequacy. 
Monitoring of urea removal is more important. If removal is 
inadequate, then dialysis is inadequate, regardless of the se-
rum level. On the other hand, a low serum urea level does not 
necessarily reflect adequate dialysis. Serum level depends not 
only on the rate of removal but also on the rate of urea gen-
eration. The generation rate is linked to the protein nitrogen 
appearance rate because most protein nitrogen is excreted as 
urea. A low serum urea level may be found in patients in whom 
removal is poor but in whom the generation rate is also low 
(e.g., due to poor protein intake).
B. Measures of urea removal. These are the urea reduction ratio (URR), 
the single-pool Kt/V (spKt/V), the equilibrated Kt/V (eKt/V), and 
the weekly standard Kt/V (stdKt/V) (see Chapter 3).
C. Dose of dialysis in terms of urea removal for thrice-weekly dialysis. In a 
secondary analysis of the randomized National Cooperative Di-
alysis Study, the rate of treatment failure increased dramatically 
in patients dialyzed three times per week when spKt/V was <0.8, 
compared with when values were > 1.0. In large 
 observational 
studies, similar results were found. For this reason, the KDOQI 
Adequacy Workgroups have recommended a minimum spKt/V 
for dialysis patients of 1.2, with a target value of at least 1.4. This 
translates to a stdKt/V urea value of 2.1 when stdKt/V is calcu-
lated using modeling or by a method that takes volume con-
traction into account. The 
 European Best Practice  Guidelines 
11
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   192 11/10/14   2:06 am
193Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
recommend a slightly higher minimum amount of dialysis, de-
fined as a minimum eKt/V of 1.2. Values for eKt/V values tend to 
be about 0.15 units lower than spKt/V, the amount depending on 
the rate of dialysis. High-level evidence guideline recommenda-
tions depend on randomized studies, and in the field of dialysis 
adequacy, the only other larger randomized study that has been 
done is the HEMO study, where an spKt/V of 1.7 was compared 
with an spKt/V of 1.3 (the study doses were actually defined in 
terms of eKt/V). Patients assigned to the higher dose of dialysis 
did not live longer, were not hospitalized less frequently, and were 
not found to manifest nutritional or other benefits. Apart from 
these two studies, there is little high-quality evidence regarding 
dialysis dose and outcomes, and almost all recommendations 
and guidelines in this area are primarily opinion-based.
1. Effect of gender . In the randomized analysis of the HEMO
trial, the women assigned to the higher dose of dialysis
survived longer than the women assigned to the standard 
dose. Survival in the men assigned to the higher dialysis
dose was slightly worse, so the overall effect of dose in
the HEMO trial was negative, and it is not clear whether
this dose–gender interaction was real or just a statistical
fluke. If women need more dialysis, the reason is unclear.
As detailed in Chapter 3, an alternative method of scaling 
dialysis dose might be to scale to body surface area (BSA)
instead of by urea distribution volume (V ). In healthy pa-
tients and in children, glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
naturally scales to BSA, and an adult man and woman
with similar values for BSA will have similar levels of GFR 
(Daugirdas, 2009). Because the ratio of V :BSA is about
12%–15% different in men than in women, under current
dosing guidelines, if a man and a woman have the same
level of V, they will get the same dose of dialysis; however,
BSA in the woman will be 12%–15% higher, so theoreti-
cally one might argue that women need about 15% more
dialysis than men. If one wishes to increase the dose of
dialysis in terms of stdKt/V, the increase in spKt/V has to
be increased by about twice as much. So this line of rea-
soning would suggest that the minimum spKt/V in women 
should be about 25%–30% higher than that in men. How-
ever, the optimum method of scaling dialysis dose is not
known, and there are no firm data other than the HEMO
study and a few observational studies to suggest that BSA 
should be used to scale dialysis dose instead of V .
2. Smaller patients . One can come up with four reasons why
smaller patients should get relatively more dialysis when
dose is measured as spKt/V:
a. Small patients (those with small values for V) would get a 
larger amount of dialysis if dose were scaled to BSA.
b. The KDOQI dose targets are in the form of spKt/V and
not eKt/V; postdialysis urea rebound tends to be larger in 
smaller patients.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   193 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
194
c. It is fairly easy to deliver a high Kt/V to small  patients (and
also women) in a short session length (e.g., 2.5  hours).
Such short session lengths may not be sufficient to al-
low for removal of middle molecules, nor for adequate
removal of excess fluid, and this  may result in a chroni -
cally overhydrated patient.
d. Short session length treatments may give a seemingly ad-
equate Kt/V level, but in patients who gain large amounts 
of fluid between treatments, short session lengths may
require a relatively high ultrafiltration (UF) rate to re -
move this fluid and high UF rates are associated with a
poor outcome.
3. Malnourished patients . When a patient’s weight is substan-
tially below the weight of his or her peers, or when a patient 
has lost a large amount of weight, one opinion is to scale
dialysis to the patient’s optimum “healthy” weight, and not 
the current reduced weight. The thinking is that the in-
creased amount of dialysis will help return the patient to
his or her healthier, premorbid condition.
4. Residual renal urea clearance (Kru) . Whether patients with
substantial residual kidney function can be managed with
lower doses of dialysis is an unanswered question. In one
large study, when patient urine volume was >100 mL per
day, the amount of dialysis delivered had little impact on
survival (Temorshuizen, 2004). Methods of adjusting dialy-
sis dose for residual kidney function are entirely opinion-
based. There are a variety of modeling-based adjustments
that can be used. Readers can look to the European Best
Practice recommendations (2002) and to the NKF-KDOQI
2006 adequacy guidelines for some suggested guidance.
D. Adequacy targets for schedules other than three times per week. There 
is no high-level evidence that can guide us in terms of dose ti-
tration when dialysis is given other than three times per week. 
One approach is to maintain a minimum stdKt/V (calculated 
using modeling or the FHN equation) of 2.1 across all dialysis 
schedules (Table 11.1). The value of 2.1 was chosen because 
it corresponds to a three-times-per-week schedule with an 
spKt/V of 1.2 (NKF-KDOQI, 2006).
1. Four to six sessions per week . In one randomized trial that
showed a benefit of more frequent dialysis, the FHN Daily
Trial, the average delivered stdKt/V averaged 3.7, consider -
ably higher than the 2.1 minimum dose suggested by NKF-
KDOQI. The average number of treatments delivered per
week was 5, and the average delivered session length was
154 minutes (FHN Trial Group, 2010).
2. Twice-a-week dialysis. In the developing world, many patients
are dialyzed only twice a week for economic reasons, and in
the United States, this was not unusual in the recent past.
Kinetic modeling using an stdKt/V approach suggests that
twice-a-week dialysis is not appropriate in patients without
some modest degree of residual kidney function. On the other 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   194 11/10/14   2:06 am
195Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
hand, there are preliminary data suggesting that starting inci-
dent patients out on twice-a-week dialysis may result in lon-
ger preservation of residual kidney function (Kalantar Zadeh, 
2014). One observational study of twice-a-week dialysis done 
in the United States was unable to show an adverse associa-
tion for this treatment strategy, and outcomes were actually 
a bit better than in patients dialyzed three times per week. 
Lack of harm may have been due to preferential selection of 
patients with some residual kidney function (Hanson, 1999), 
but there was no definitive evidence that this was the case.
E. Adequacy targets based on metrics other than urea removal.
1. Dialysis time . Urea removal is only one measure of dialysis
adequacy. For solutes such as phosphorus and middle 
 molecules, total weekly time is the major determinant of re-
moval. Short weekly time also makes it difficult to remove 
excess salt and water from patients safely and effectively. 
The US KDOQI 2006 adequacy work group recommended 
a minimum session length of 3 hours for patients dialyzed 
three times per week with little residual renal function. 
The European Best Practices Group (2002) recommends a 
minimum 4-hour treatment time. The benefits of dialysis 
sessions longer than 3.5 hours are not clear, and seem to 
be greatest in Japan and intermediate in Europe; benefits 
are difficult to demonstrate in the United States (Tentori, 
2012), perhaps because of the more intense dialysis given 
in that country. Also, dose-versus-outcomes data may be 
confounded by dose-targeting bias, a situation where sur -
vival is higher in patients who are meeting whatever dose 
target is being applied (Daugirdas, 2013). In the United 
States, the average dialysis time is about 3.5 hours and is 
increasing toward 4 hours, similar to the practice in the 
rest of the world. A large randomized study (TiMe trial) 
is currently underway in the United States to determine 
whether setting a minimum dialysis time of 4.25 hours for 
all new (incident) patients, regardless of body size, will re-
sult in meaningful outcome benefits. A substantial number 
of patients in the United States dialyze 
 in-center overnight 
Scheduleb Kr , 2 mL/min per 1.73 m 2 Kr . 2 mL /min per 1.73 m2
Two times per week Not recommended 2.0
Three times per week 1.2 0.9
Four times per week 0.8 0.6
Assumes session lengths of 3.5–4 hr; Kr = residual kidney clearance.
a Target spKt/V values should be about 15% higher than the minimum values shown.
b Frequent dialysis (five and six times per week) is more completely discussed in Chapter 16.
Adapted from NKF-KDOQI Clinical Practice Recommendations. Hemodialysis Adequacy. Update 
2006. Am J Kidney Dis. 2006:48:(Suppl1):S2–S90.
Minimuma spKt/V Values for Various Frequency Schedules 
of Dialysis (Achieving an Estimated stdKt/V = 2.1)11.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   195 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
196
for about 6–9 hours per treatment. This strategy is de-
scribed more completely in Chapter 16.
Another argument against Kt/V is that a focus on urea 
removal tends to drive high-efficiency dialysis, with use of 
large dialyzers and rapid blood flows; the high efficiency of 
such treatments may result in solute disequilibrium and intra-
dialytic side effects. Also, high blood flow rates delivered using 
the requisite larger needle sizes may engender more blood tur-
bulence and platelet activation, as well as access dysfunction. 
A related question is whether one should make “optimum” 
use of the dialysis time by prescribing the highest blood flow 
that is consistently achievable, and using the most efficient 
(high K0A) dialyzer that one can afford. An alternative “slow 
and gentle” approach remains popular in Europe, according 
to which low blood flow rates and relatively small dialyzers 
are used. There are no randomized trials available to help 
choose between these two options. The best approach may be 
to set targets on the basis of both Kt/V (perhaps with higher 
minimum targets for women and smaller patients) and dialy-
sis time. Changing the Kt/V target to a surface- area-adjusted 
value by itself solves the problem of short dialysis time given to 
smaller patients and women, as the amount of dialysis given 
to such patients based on surface area needs to be consider-
ably larger, and this takes more time to deliver.
 II. WRITING THE INITIAL PRESCRIPTION
A. The dialysis dose: K  t. A dialysis prescription involves two main 
components: K, the dialyzer clearance, and t, the dialysis ses-
sion length. K, in turn, depends on the dialyzer size used and 
the blood flow rate. The dialysate flow rate also plays a small 
role as discussed in Chapter 3.
1. K usually ranges from 200 to 260 mL  /min. For adult patients dia -
lyzed using a blood flow rate of 400 mL/min, dialyzer clear-
ance K will usually be about 230 ± 30 mL/min. One can use a 
urea kinetics calculator or a nomogram such as  Figure 13.6, 
to get a reasonable estimate of dialyzer clearance from the 
blood flow rate and the efficiency of the dialyzer (K 0A) be-
ing used. If we assume that K will be 250 mL/min for a di-
alysis session length of 4 hours, K × t will be 250 × 240 = 
60,000 mL or 60 L. This represents the total volume of blood 
cleared of urea during the dialysis session.
2. T argeting K  t on the basis of patient size and desired Kt/V. Assume 
that we have a clearance of 250 mL/min and a session length 
of 4 hours. How large a patient could we dialyze and still meet 
KDOQI guidelines? Remember that the guidelines suggest 
using a prescribed (K × t)/V of 1.4 to ensure that the delivered 
dose stays above 1.2. Over the 4-hour session we are deliver-
ing 60 L of K  × t, and if we want a prescribed Kt/V of 1.4, V 
must be 60/1.4 = 43 L, corresponding to a weight of about  
78 kg. See Tables 11.2 and 11.3 for some additional examples.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   196 11/10/14   2:06 am
197Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
Step 1: Estimate the patient’s V.
Step 2: Multiply V by the desired Kt /V to get the required K  t.
Step 3: Compute required K for a given t, or the required t for a given K.
Step 1. Estimate V. This is best done from anthropometric equations incorporating 
height, weight, age, and gender as devised by Watson (Appendix A). If the 
patient is African American, add 2 kg to the Watson value for Vant. Alternatively, 
one can use the Hume–Weyers equations or the nomogram derived from them 
(Appendix A). Assume that, in this case, the estimated V is 40 L.
Step 2. Compute the required K  t. If the desired Kt /V is 1.5 and the estimated V is 
40 L, then the required K × t is 1.5 times V, or 1.5 × 40 = 60 L.
Step 3. Compute the required t or K. The required K × t can be achieved with a 
variety of different combinations of K (which depends on K0A, QB, and QD) and t. A 
variety of urea modeling programs are available that will do a computer simulation 
of various scenarios and come up with many possible combinations of K and t. 
Internet-based calculators can be accessed via the Web References cited at the 
end of this chapter.
Given a desired session length t, how to compute required K.
One approach is to input a session length t and then ask: What kind of dialyzer, 
blood flow rate, and dialysate flow rate would I then need to achieve the required 
K × t? Again, simple algebra is sufficient. From the previous example:
Desired spKt /V = 1.5; Vant = 40 L, K × t = 60 L
First, convert K × t to milliliters to get 60,000 mL. If the desired session length is 4 
hr, or 240 min:
Desired t = 240 min
Required K = (K × t)/t = 60,000/240 = 250 mL/min
Now that we know the required K, how to choose K0A, QB, and QD.
How does one now choose K0A, QB, and QD? A simple way is to select the most 
rapid value of QB that can be reliably and consistently delivered. Assume in this 
patient that a blood pump speed of 400 mL/min will be possible. One can then 
go to the K-K0A-QB nomogram (Figure 13.6) to find the approximate dialyzer K 0A 
value that will be required to achieve a K  of 250 mL/min at a blood flow rate of 
400 mL/min.
To find the required dialyzer K0A, find 400 (which is QB) on the horizontal axis, 
then go up until you find 250 (desired K) on the vertical axis. At this point, you are 
on a K0A line of about 900, so a dialyzer with a K0A value of at least 900 mL/min 
will be needed. If such a high-efficiency dialyzer is not available, one will need 
to dialyze longer than 4 hours. Some 5%–10% improvement in K can be obtained 
by increasing dialysate flow rate to 800 mL/min. However, with some modern 
dialyzers that include spacer yarns to optimize dialysate flow around the fibers, 
increasing dialysate flow from 600 to 800 mL/min was shown to have very little 
impact (Ward, 2011).
The Initial Prescription for a Specific Patient to Achieve a 
Desired spKt/V.11.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   197 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
198
B. How weight change during dialysis affects the dialysis prescription . In 
patients who have large weight gains, one will need a higher 
Kt/V to get a given URR than in patients with minimal weight 
gain (see Figure 3.14 in Chapter 3). For example, to get a URR 
of 70%, one needs to prescribe a Kt/V of only 1.3 if no fluid is 
removed, but one needs a Kt/V of 1.5 if the weight loss during 
dialysis (UF/W) is 6% of the body weight (see the 0.06 UF/W 
line in Figure 3.14).
III. CHECKING THE DELIVERED DOSE OF DIALYSIS . The dialysis dose is
usually monitored on a monthly basis, according to KDOQI
guidelines, by drawing a predialysis and postdialysis serum urea
nitrogen (SUN). Alternatively and/or additionally, in vivo dialyzer 
clearance can be monitored during each treatment by checking
the dialyzer sodium clearance, or delivered dialysis dose can be
followed by tracking the UV absorbance of the spent dialysate, as 
described in Chapter 3.
A common situation occurs when the maximum blood flow rate that can be 
reliably delivered is known. Often, one has a choice between using a larger (more 
expensive) or a smaller (slightly cheaper) dialyzer. Let us assume that one is 
constrained to use a dialysate flow rate of 500 mL/min. What would the dialysis 
session length then need to be to achieve a target spKt/V of 1.5? Let us assume 
that we are prescribing for the same patient, with an estimated V of 40 L, which 
means that K × t again must be 60 L, or 60,000 mL. Assume that the projected 
blood flow rate is 400 mL/min. Of the two dialyzers available, we look up their K
0A 
(maximum clearance) values and find they are 1,400 mL/min for the larger one and 
800 mL/min for the smaller one. So how long do we need to dialyze this patient with 
each of the two dialyzers?
Step 1:
 From Figure 13.6 (which we can use because QD = 500 mL/min), find the 
K corresponding to QB of 400 mL/min (x-axis value) for each of the two dialyzers. 
K will be the value on the vertical axis that corresponds to the intersection of the 
1,400- and 800-K0A lines with a perpendicular rising from the horizontal axis (QB) at 
a point representing 400 mL/min. We find that the K values are about 270 mL/min 
for the bigger (K
0A = 1,400) dialyzer and 220 mL/min for the smaller (K0A = 800) 
dialyzer.
Step 2: We know that spKt/V = 1.5 and estimated V = 40 L. Our desired K × t is 
60 L, or 60,000 mL. By algebra:
225 55 5 3 3555 5
225 55 5 3 3555 5
KA dialyzer K Kt
K
KA dialyzer K Kt
K
800 , 200:t () 60,000
220 273 min
1400 , 270:t () 60,000
270 222 min
0
0
Our calculations thus suggest that we will need to dialyze for 50 minutes longer 
using the smaller (K0A = 800) dialyzer to achieve the same spKt/V of 1.5.
Given an Actual Blood Flow Rate (QB), How to Compute Required 
Session Length Given Two Possible Choices of Dialyzers11.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   198 11/10/14   2:06 am
199Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
The pre- and post-SUN values are used to compute the URR, 
which is then combined with information concerning UF/W and 
with some other adjustments to compute the delivered spKt/V. 
One caveat: When checking the URR, one must be sure to use a 
properly drawn postdialysis blood specimen. In the presence of 
access recirculation, the postdialysis blood may be low due to 
admixture with dialyzer outlet blood unless a slow-blood-flow or 
a stop-dialysate-flow technique is used. Two KDOQI-suggested 
techniques for blood drawing are described in Table 11.4, and the 
reasons behind them are explained in detail in Chapter 3.
A. Methods of computing spKt/V from the pre- and post-SUN
1. Nomogram method. One uses Figure 3.14 as described before.
Assume that a URR of 0.70 or 70% is measured. Depending 
on whether 0%, 3%, or 6% of the body weight was removed 
during the dialysis treatment, the delivered spKt/V for that 
treatment will be 1.3, 1.4, or 1.5, respectively.
2. More exact methods . The optimal method recommended by
the KDOQI guidelines to calculate Kt/V is to use a urea ki-
netic modeling program. The basic principles of how such 
programs work are described in Chapter 3. These programs 
are available commercially, and one, Solute Solver, is avail-
able on the Internet (http://www.ureakinetics.org). An al-
ternative method that is approved by KDOQI is to use the 
following equation (Daugirdas, 1993):
spKt/V = –ln(R – 0.008 × t) + (4 – 3.5 × R) × UF/W
where R is (1 – URR), or simply post-SUN/pre-SUN, 
t is the session length in hours, –ln is the negative natural 
logarithm, UF is the weight loss in kilograms, and W is the 
postdialysis weight. See Chapter 3 for a more complete dis-
cussion of this formula.
Principles
The effect of access recirculation will reverse quickly. When blood flow is slowed 
to 100 mL/min, the inflow urea concentration will rise in about 10–20 s (depending 
on the amount of dead space in the arterial line, usually about 10 mL).
Method
1.
 Set UF rate to 0.
2. Slow the blood pump to 100 mL/min for 10–20 s.
3. Stop the pump.
4. Draw a sample, either from the arterial blood line sampling port or from the 
tubing attached to the arterial needle.
Alternate Method
1. Set UF rate to 0.
2. Put dialysate into bypass.
3. Keep blood flow going at usual rate; wait 3 min.
4. Draw the sample.
Guidelines for Obtaining the Postdialysis Serum Urea 
 Nitrogen Sample11.4
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   199 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
200
I V. ADJUSTING THE INITIAL DIALYSIS PRESCRIPTION . When patients are
put on a particular dialysis prescription, even when there are no
apparent changes in therapy, the delivered spKt/V derived from
the measured URR often will vary considerably from month to
month. The reasons are not completely clear, but laboratory error 
in measuring the SUN values in the samples, possible variations
in how the postdialysis blood is drawn and variations in actual
session length, time-averaged blood flow rate, and dialyzer clear-
ance may all have a role. It may be useful to average the spKt/V
value from three monthly treatments to determine whether or
not the standard minimum spKt/V of 1.2 is being delivered.
Example: Assume that we want to target an spKt/V of 1.5. The 
patient is monitored monthly , and from the URR the following
spKt/V values are obtained:
Month spKt / V
Jan 1.40
Feb 1.35
Mar 1.54
Apr 1.30
The average of these values is 1.40. Although this is well 
within KDOQI targets for dialysis adequacy, if one wishes to 
achieve the original spKt/V goal of 1.5, one needs to increase the 
numerator (K×t) in Kt/V by a factor of 1.5/1.4, or 1.07 (7%).
One now has a choice in that either the K  or the t  term can 
be increased by 7% (or each one can be increased so that their 
product increases by 7%). The simplest way to increase Kt/V from 
1.4 to 1.5 is to increase dialysis session length by 7%. This would 
mean adding 17 minutes to a 4-hour treatment (1.07  × 240 = 
257 minutes). Another option is to try to increase the K  term by 
going to a higher blood flow rate, going to a larger dialyzer, or 
increasing the dialysate flow rate. However, it is often difficult 
to increase the blood flow rate further. The impact of changing 
to a more efficient dialyzer can be estimated from the K
0A ver-
sus clearance nomogram shown in Figure 3.6. Increasing dialy-
sate flow rate to 800 mL/min, which typically results in about a 
5%–10% increase in clearance as long as the blood flow rate is 
>400 mL/min might also do the trick, but is not always helpful 
with some advanced dialyzers where the dialysate flow path is 
already optimized (Ward, 2011).
 V. THE CONCEPT OF MODELED V. One of the advantages of using a mod-
eling program is that the computer calculates how much urea 
was removed, and then, on the basis of the URR, weight change 
and session length, calculates the size of the volume from which 
the urea appears to have been removed. To do this, the computer 
uses a “marbles in the box” approach described in Chapter 3. It is 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   200 11/10/14   2:06 am
201Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
important to recognize that V is a tool that is used to assess dialy-
sis adequacy. It does not always reflect the true urea distribution 
volume. Computers are not very smart, in the sense that they use 
only the information given to them. For example, if the URR and 
hence spKt/V suddenly decrease owing to a batch of bad dialyz-
ers, all the computer knows is that the spKt/V has suddenly fallen, 
but it is not told that the dialyzer clearance (K) has changed. Also, 
the session length (t ) has not changed. How, then, can the com-
puter explain the sudden decrease in spKt/V if K×t is unchanged? 
All it knows is that (K×t)/V is lower than it was, and that (K×t) is 
unchanged. The only way the computer can explain this scenario 
is to assume that the patient’s urea distribution volume (V) must 
have increased. A marked change in a patient’s true volume hap-
pens only rarely, so a rise in modeled V usually means that for some 
reason, less dialysis was given than was ordered or anticipated.
A. Monitoring modeled V in individual patients.
Example 1. In a different patient, in May an spKt/V of 1.5 is 
delivered, and the computer models the size of the patient’s 
urea volume (modeled V ) as 43 L. Values for the subsequent  
4 months are as shown.
Month spKt/V Modeled V
May 1.5 43
Jun 1.43 45
Jul 1.7 38
Aug 1.8 36
Sep 1.1 58
A transient increase in the value for V  was found in 
 September owing to an unexpectedly low value for the spKt/V. 
What should be done at this point?
Step 1: Review the dialysis run sheet for the September treat -
ment. The low spKt/V and the apparent rise in V most 
probably reflect an unrecorded decrease in K or t. Was 
the treatment shortened? Was the blood flow rate re-
duced during all or part of the treatment? Did the di-
alysate concentrate run out? Were there problems with 
access during the treatment? If the answer to these 
questions is no, it can be assumed that the aberrant re-
sult was most likely due to measurement error.
Step 2: The prescription should not be changed at this point. 
One approach is to obtain one or more additional pre-/
post-SUN measurements to determine whether the low 
spKt/V value was a fluke or something about which to 
be concerned. The September spKt/V measure is still 1.1, 
which is close to the minimum KDOQI guideline of 1.2, 
so, one could justify waiting for the next regular monthly 
blood draw. This situation shows why having some sort 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   201 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
202
of machine-generated clearance, from either dialyzer so-
dium clearance or UV dialysate absorbance, would be of 
great help, as these clearances are measured every treat-
ment, and they would show whether the low September 
value is an anomaly or some form of laboratory error.
A repeat spKt/V should be measured, and if the repeat 
value is still low, this means that some major problem has 
developed in delivering either the prescribed K or t. The most 
likely explanation that would cause a decrease in spKt/V of this 
magnitude would be the development of access recirculation. 
Other potential causes are discussed in Table 11.5.
Example 2 (sustained fall in V). Suppose that in another 
 patient we have a sustained increase in spKt/V for no apparent 
reason, causing a decrease in modeled V:
Month spKt /V Modeled V
Jul 1.2 54
Aug 1.15 56
Sep 1.35 48
Oct 1.18 55
Nov 1.5 43
Dec 1.43 45
Jan 1.5 43
Feb 1.43 45
Mar 1.7 38
Apr 1.47 43
Here we have a patient whose V was initially about 54 L, and 
then, sometime around November, the V appeared to decrease 
suddenly to about 44 L. The treatment was unchanged. spKt/V 
jumped from 1.2 to 1.5, so the computer interprets this as a 
 patient who has shrunk. What could cause this (Table 11.5)?
Step 1: T he first possibility to rule out is a true decrease in V, 
which can occur either because of better removal of 
chronic overhydration or because of loss of lean body 
mass due to intercurrent illness. Such a massive change 
is unlikely and can easily be ruled out by checking the 
patient’s weights.
Step 2: Re view the dialysis run sheets. Assuming that the   
patient’s weight has not markedly decreased, true V has 
not decreased. Rather, the K×t must have increased 
in some manner relative to that delivered in October. 
The goal is to explain how this could have occurred. 
One needs to compare the run sheets before and after 
 October. It is possible that a preexisting problem in 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   202 11/10/14   2:06 am
203Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
delivering the entire session length or prescribed blood 
flow rate that was active prior to October was corrected 
in October and the months that followed.
Step 3: A ccess recirculation/needle placement. If there was a 
change in access in October, then this might have re-
sulted in cessation of access recirculation, or perhaps 
prior to October the needles were being reversed and 
after October the problem was found and corrected.
Step 4: C heck to see whether there was a systematic change 
in how the blood samples were collected. Consider the 
following scenario: This patient always had access re-
circulation; however, prior to October, the postdialysis 
sample was drawn using a proper slow-flow method. 
Then, in October a new technician arrived, who drew 
the postdialysis samples after simply stopping the blood 
pump, without any antecedent slow-flow period to clear 
the blood line of recirculated blood. This would result 
in a sudden, unexplained drop in the postdialysis SUN, 
which would translate into a factitious rise in the URR 
and spKt/V, with a concomitant fall in modeled V.
 VI. MONITORING CHANGES IN V FOR THE ENTIRE UNIT AS A QUALITY ASSUR-
ANCE TOOL. Whereas large fluctuations in V can occur in individ -
ual patients, averaging the modeled V for the entire unit is useful 
as a quality assurance tool and can identify several problems as-
sociated with dialysis delivery. Here, a small change in V for the 
Reasons why delivered Kt/V may be less than prescribed (in this case, modeled V 
will be increased)
Patient’s V greater than initial estimate (initial Rx only)
Actual blood flow less than that marked on the blood pump (very common when 
prepump negative pressure is high)
Blood flow temporarily lowered (symptoms or other reasons)
Actual dialysis session length shorter than prescribed
Dialyzer K0A less than expected (manufacturer specifications incorrect, decreased 
due to reuse, etc.)
Access recirculation or inadvertent needle reversal (when postdialysis SUN is 
drawn properly using a slow-flow period prior to the draw)
Rebound (use of delayed postdialysis SUN to compute spKt/V and V)
Reasons why delivered Kt /V may be greater than prescribed (in this case, 
 modeled V will be decreased)
Patient’s V less than initial estimate (initial Rx only) or recent, severe weight loss
Postdialysis SUN specimen artifactually low
Access recirculation or inadvertent needle reversal, and postdialysis blood 
contaminated with dialyzer outlet blood (slow-flow method not used)
Specimen drawn from dialyzer outlet blood line
Session length longer than the time recorded
Recent correction of access recirculation or inadvertent needle reversal
SUN, serum urea nitrogen.
Reasons Why the Urea Reduction Ratio-Based Delivered 
spKt/V May Be Different Than Prescribed Kt/V11.5
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   203 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
204
unit over time can often be detected. It is useful to compute both 
an anthropometric V (V ant) and the modeled V for each patient, 
and to follow the ratio of the two. Unit wide, V/Vant should average 
close to 0.90–1.0. An average unit-wide ratio >1.0 suggests that 
one or both components of K×t are being overestimated.
 VII. INABILITY TO REACH  THE DESIRED spKt/V. Patients in whom it is
 difficult to reach an spKt/V of at least 1.2 fall into three catego-
ries: (a) patients with poor access, resulting in either limitation of
blood flow and/or access recirculation; (b) very large patients; and  
(c) patients with frequent hypotension, angina, or other side ef-
fects, resulting in frequent reductions in blood flow during dialysis.
A. Therapy four times per week. Four-sessions-per-week schedules are 
becoming increasingly popular for treating larger patients as 
well as patients with hypertension and problems with remov -
ing excess fluid. The 2006 version of the KDOQI clinical prac-
tice recommendations suggest that with such schedules, when 
residual renal urea clearance is below 2.0 mL/min per 1.73 m
2, 
the minimum spKt/V value can be reduced from 1.2 to about 
0.8 (Table 11.1). One additional advantage of a four-per-week 
schedule is that it avoids the long, weekend interdialytic inter-
val, around which adverse events and deaths are more common 
(Foley, 2011).
 VIII. COMPUTING AND MONITORING THE NORMALIZED PROTEIN NITROGEN
APPEARANCE RATE (nPNA). This is described in Chapter 3, and moni-
toring of nutritional status is discussed in Chapter 31.
IX. CHOICE OF DIALYZER
A. Membrane material. Issues pertaining to biocompatibility and acute 
dialyzer reactions are discussed in Chapters 4, 10, and 12.
B. Should a high-flux dialyzer be used?  This question was partially
answered by the NIH HEMO trial. Although randomiza-
tion to high-flux membranes was associated with about an 
8% increased survival, this did not attain statistical signifi-
cance. Significant benefits in survival were measured in the 
predefined subgroup of patients who were on dialysis longer 
than 3.7 years (the median level for the HEMO patients). Also, 
cardiovascular mortality appeared to be reduced in all pa -
tients assigned to high-flux dialysis. These data are generally 
in 
 accord with the European MPO trial (Locatelli, 2009). On 
the basis of these results, both the KDOQI Adequacy Work -
group in 2006 (reiterated in 2015) and the European Best 
Practices Group recommend the use of a high-flux membrane 
where proper water treatment is available. Use of high-flux 
membranes may also reduce the incidence of beta-2 micro-
globulin amyloidosis in patients dialyzed for many years. It 
is not clear whether this benefit is due to enhanced removal 
of beta-2 microglobulin or whether use of more advanced di-
alysis technology associated with high-flux dialysis results in 
less procedure-related inflammation.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   204 11/10/14   2:06 am
205Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
 X. FLUID REMOVAL ORDERS
A. Concept of “dry weight” or optimum postdialysis weight. The so-called 
“dry weight” (optimum postdialysis weight is a better term) is 
the postdialysis weight at which all or most excess body fluid 
has been removed. If the dry weight is set too high, the patient 
will remain in a fluid-overloaded state at the end of the dialy-
sis session. Fluid ingestion during the interdialysis interval 
might then result in edema or pulmonary congestion. If the 
dry weight is set too low, the patient may suffer frequent hypo-
tensive episodes during the latter part of the dialysis session. 
Patients who have been ultrafiltered to below their optimum 
postdialysis weight often experience malaise, a washed-out 
feeling, cramps, and dizziness after dialysis. The postdialysis 
recovery is extremely stressful and unpleasant.
In practice, the optimum postdialysis weight of each pa-
tient must be determined on a trial-and-error basis. When set-
ting the UF rate, allow for the 0.2 L of saline that the patient 
will receive at the end of dialysis during the blood return pro-
cedure. Also, compensate for any fluid ingestion or parenteral 
fluid administration during the treatment session.
1. Frequent resetting of the optimum postdialysis weight. A common er-
ror in dialysis units is failure to reevaluate the optimum post-
dialysis weight often enough. If a patient loses flesh weight, 
the previously set dry weight becomes too high, and if main-
tained, can result in patient overhydration and hospitalization 
for fluid overload. The optimum postdialysis weight should 
therefore be reevaluated at least every 2 weeks. A progressive 
decrease in the optimum postdialysis weight can be a clue to 
an underlying nutritional disturbance or disease process.
As discussed in Chapter 33, clinical determination of 
optimum postdialysis weight based on signs of edema or 
lung râles is unreliable. Bioimpedance devices identify an 
important subset of patients who appear to be markedly 
fluid-overloaded despite no outward signs of edema. A dif-
ferent subset of patients is made up of those who have been 
taken below their optimum postdialysis weight (Hecking, 
2013). This can result in large interdialytic weight gains and 
heightened sodium intake as patients struggle to return to 
a more optimum weight, and can also result in accelerated 
loss of residual kidney function.
The use of bioimpedance to help identify optimum 
postdialysis weight, along with other technology such as 
lung ultrasound (“comets”), is discussed more completely 
in Chapter 33. While the new technology is helpful, experi-
ence with these devices is just beginning, and with whole-
body bioimpedance, for example, it is not clear to what 
extent their estimate of fluid overload is applicable to di-
alysis patients of various body mass index levels.
B. Fluid removal rate. Usually, fluid is removed at a constant rate dur-
ing dialysis. There has been interest in restricting maximum UF 
rate as a quality assurance tool. Evidence suggests that patients 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   205 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
206
in whom the UF rate is <12 mL/kg per hr have a higher survival 
rate (Movilli, 2007). It is not clear whether UF limits should 
be scaled to body weight, to BSA, or remain unscaled (e.g., 
<800  mL/hr) (Lacson, 2014). There are several approaches by 
which the fluid removal rate can be reduced. The most obvious 
is to extend the dialysis time, but this is not the only approach: 
reducing interdialytic weight gain by limiting sodium intake 
often is more acceptable to the patient and easy to implement 
(Burkart, 2012). In patients with substantial urine volume, use 
of diuretics will reduce UF rate by virtue of increasing daily urine 
volume unless the patient reacts by taking in more fluid.
There is some interest in using a nonconstant fluid re-
moval rate during a dialysis session. In one approach, the fluid 
removal rate is increased during the initial 1–2 hours of dialy-
sis and reduced toward the end of dialysis. The dialysis solution 
sodium level also may be increased during the initial phase of 
dialysis to help maintain the blood volume osmotically. The 
benefits of this approach remain controversial.
XI. DIALYSIS SOLUTIONS (Table 11.6)
A. Flow rate. The standard dialysis solution flow rate is 500 mL/
min. When the blood flow rate is high (e.g., >400 mL/min) and 
when a high-K
0A dialyzer is used, increasing the dialysis solu-
tion flow rate to 800 mL/min will increase dialyzer clearance 
(K) by about 5%–10%. The optimum value for the dialysis solu-
tion flow rate is 1.5 to 2.0 times the blood flow rate.
B. Composition
1. Bicarbonate concentration. Bicarbonate dialysis solution is the 
fluid of choice, and use of acetate-based dialysate is now 
considered obsolete in most countries.
The concentration of base should be adjusted to 
achieve a predialysis plasma bicarbonate concentration of 
20–23 mmol/L. There has been some interest in increas-
ing dialysis solution bicarbonate level, or giving supple -
mentary oral bicarbonate to increase the predialysis HCO
3 
Flow rate:
500 mL/min
Base:
Bicarbonate (32 mM)/plus acetate (4 mM); or bicarbonate 28 mM / plus acetate 8 mMa
Electrolytes and dextrose:
Potassium = 2.0 mM (3.0 mM for patients taking digitalis, or patients with a  
low-normal potassium predialysis)
Sodium = 135–145 mM (138 mM)
Dextrose = 100 mg/dL (5.5 mmol/L)
Calcium = 1.25–1.5 mM (2.5–3.0 mEq/L; depends on the type of phosphate  
binder used)
Magnesium = 0.50 mM (1.0 mEq/L)
aFor example, when using sodium diacetate (Granuflo) dry acid concentrate.
Dialysis Solution Orders
11.6
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   206 11/10/14   2:06 am
207Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
level. A definite clinical benefit of raising predialysis HCO 3 
beyond 20–23 has not been shown. Metabolic alkalosis 
may result postdialysis in such patients, with theoretical 
increased risk of calcium–phosphorus precipitation, and of 
cardiac arrhythmia.
As discussed in Chapter 4, in dialysis machines that 
are capable of adjusting the dialysis solution bicarbonate 
level, the machine readout usually gives the bicarbonate 
level of the product dialysate not taking into account the 
presence of any bicarbonate-generating anions such as 
acetate or citrate. Acetate, especially when sodium diace-
tate is used in the concentrate, can add as much as 8 mM 
of bicarbonate-generating base to the dialysate. This added 
base content should be kept in mind when titrating dialysis 
solution to bicarbonate to the serum level.
The average dialysis solution bicarbonate level tends to 
be higher in the United States than in some European coun-
tries, and high dialysis bicarbonate values have been associ-
ated with increased mortality (Tentori, 2013). The increased 
mortality was due primarily to infectious, rather than to 
cardiovascular, causes. It is not at all clear whether this as-
sociation is causal or mediated by some sort of confounding. 
Mortality is increased in patients with both low and high pre-
dialysis serum bicarbonate, but the mortality at the high end 
is confounded by malnutrition, as patients with low predialy-
sis serum bicarbonate levels are commonly malnourished.
High dialysis solution bicarbonate has been shown to 
act synergistically with low dialysis solution calcium and 
potassium (Di Iorio, 2012) to prolong the QTc interval on 
the electrocardiogram, a change associated with increased 
risk of arrhythmia.
2. Potassium. The usual dialysis solution potassium level is 2.0 mM 
unless the patient’s usual predialysis plasma potassium con-
centration is <4.5 or unless the patient is receiving digitalis.
In the latter two instances, the dialysis solution potassium
level should usually be 3.0 mM. Should the interdialytic serum 
potassium levels be high because of the use of this 3-mM di-
alysis solution, chronic administration of sodium polystyrene
sulfonate resin may be required. The new potassium-binding
compounds under development, ZS-9 (ZS Pharma, Coppell,
TX) and Partiromer (Relypsa, Redwood City, CA) respectively, 
may increase caregiver options in this regard.
Malnourished patients may have low predialysis se-
rum 
 potassium levels, and in these patients the dialysate 
 potassium level can and should be increased to avoid 
 hypokalemia. Use of 1.0-mM potassium dialysate on a chronic 
basis to control hyperkalemia has been associated with in -
creased incidence of cardiac arrest (Lafrance, 2006). If a low 
dialysis solution potassium level is used at all, it should be 
used on a relatively short-term basis. If the patient stops in-
gesting a high-potassium diet for whatever reason, continued 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   207 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
208
use of a low-potassium dialysis solution can then result in ad-
verse consequences. Survival is highest in patients being dia-
lyzed against a 3 K bath or higher (Jadoul, 2012).
3. Sodium. The usual dialysis solution sodium level is between 
135 and 145 mM. Levels above 138 mM are associated with 
increased thirst and weight gain between dialyses, although 
the extra fluid often can be removed during dialysis with 
fewer symptoms. The blood pressure may increase. Dialysis 
solution sodium levels lower than 135 mM predispose to 
hypotension and cramps.
One study suggests that patients may have individ-
ual “set points” for sodium (Keen, 1997). Little is known 
about why some dialysis patients have low predialysis so-
dium values. Predialysis hyponatremia has been linked to 
overhydration and increased interdialytic weight gain. In 
nondialysis populations, as well as in dialysis patients, hy-
ponatremia is associated with an increased mortality risk. 
These patients may have cardiac dysfunction with nonos-
motic release of vasopressin, or some sort of “sick cell” syn-
drome with impairment of the Na–K exchanger, reflecting 
overall poor health. In patients with a low sodium set point, 
a lower dialysis sodium level can logically be used, which 
should minimize postdialysis thirst and weight gain. How -
ever, a cross-sectional study found slightly better survival 
when hyponatremic patients were dialyzed against higher 
sodium dialysis solution (Hecking, 2012).
4. Dextrose. In the United States, it is common to add dextrose 
(200  mg/dL or 11 mmol/L) to dialysis solutions. The pres-
ence of dextrose may reduce the incidence of hypoglycemia 
during dialysis. In Europe, a lower dextrose concentration, 
100 mg/dL or 5.5 mmol/L, is commonly used. The Europeans 
may be right, as some data suggest that the lower glucose 
level still protects against hypoglycemia, but is associated 
with better control of blood sugar. Also, high dialysis glucose 
solutions encourage potassium (and possible phosphorus) 
 entry into cells, reducing their removal during dialysis.
5. Calcium. Dialysis solution calcium levels in chronic patients 
normally range from 1.25 to 1.5 mM (2.5–3.0 mEq/L). The 
usual level in patients taking calcium-containing phospho-
rus binders is 1.25 mM (2.5 mEq/L), but the level may have 
to be adjusted upward or downward depending on clini-
cal response and parathyroid hormone status. In patients 
taking the newer resin-based phosphate binders, which 
do not contain calcium, the dialysis solution calcium level 
may need to be increased to avoid negative calcium bal-
ance. Dialysis solution calcium levels lower than 1.25 mM 
(2.5 mEq/L) have been advocated by some when calcium-
containing phosphorus binders are used, in order to pre -
vent calcium overload. However, use of such low dialysate 
calcium solutions has been associated with increased risk 
of sudden cardiac arrest (Pun, 2013).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   208 11/10/14   2:06 am
209Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
6. Magnesium. The usual dialysis solution magnesium level is
0.25–0.5 mM (0.5–1.0 mEq/L). In general, dialysis patient
survival is better when such patients are not hypomagne-
semic. Also, frequent use of protein-pump inhibitors in this 
population may reduce oral magnesium absorption and in-
crease the risk of hypomagnesemia (Alhosaini, 2014). The
trend is to use 0.5 mM (1.0 mEq/L) solution, at the higher
end of this range.
C. Temperature. The dialysate temperature should be set as low 
as possible without engendering patient discomfort, gener -
ally in the range of 34.5°C–36.5°C. As discussed in Chapter 
12, individualization of cool dialysate, effected by measuring 
patient tympanic membrane temperature and setting dialysis 
solution temperature 0.5°C lower, may retain the benefits of 
cool dialysis solution in terms of protection from intradialytic 
hypotension and shortening of postdialysis recovery time, 
while avoiding the discomfort of feeling cold and shivering. 
Individualized cool dialysate also may reduce the incidence 
of myocardial stunning and dialysis-associated ischemic dam-
age to brain white matter. In one study from China, use of cool 
temperature dialysis solution chronically was associated with 
reduced cardiovascular morbidity and mortality (Hsu, 2012).
XII. ANTICOAGULATION ORDERS. See Chapter 14.
 XIII. STANDING ORDERS FOR COMPLICATIONS. Complications are discussed 
in depth in Chapter 12. Frequently occurring complications, such 
as hypotension, cramps, restlessness, nausea, vomiting, itching,
and chest pain, can be managed with a set of standing orders.
However, symptoms during dialysis may be the result of a more
serious disease process that can require immediate diagnosis and 
specific treatment.
 XIV . PATIENT MONITORING
A. Prior to and during the treatment session
1. Prior to dialysis
a. Weight. The predialysis weight should be compared with 
the patient’s last postdialysis weight and with the tar -
get optimum weight to obtain some idea of interdialysis 
weight gain. A large interdialysis weight gain, especially 
when coupled with symptoms of orthopnea or dyspnea, 
should prompt a complete cardiovascular examination
and reassessment of the target weight (it may be too
high). Patients should strive to keep their interdialysis
weight gain below 1.0 kg per day, although the average
weight gain tends to be higher. They also need to be
counseled about limiting sodium rather than fluid in-
take, as the water intake generally follows that of salt.
Excessive thirst may be due to a high dialysis solution
sodium level. Complaints of a washed-out feeling or of
persistent muscle cramps after dialysis suggest that the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   209 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
210
target postdialysis weight is too low. As noted above, 
postdialysis recovery time can be shortened by use of 
cool dialysis solution.
b. Blood pressure. The optimum blood pressure to monitor is 
controversial, and either average intradialytic pressure or 
postdialysis pressure may be more predictive of volume 
overload than predialysis pressure (see Chapter 33). In 
some patients, blood pressure can increase during dialysis 
despite fluid removal. The causes are speculative, but this 
has been associated with poor survival. Volume-resistant 
hypertensive patients sometimes benefit from further 
fluid removal, and blood pressure may decrease only after 
a lag period of several months (Fishbane, 1996).
Patients with hypertension are routinely counseled 
to withhold their blood pressure medication on the day of 
dialysis to limit the incidence of dialysis hypotension. This 
is not absolutely necessary, especially for patients who will 
be dialyzed in the afternoon. Management of high blood 
pressure is described in Chapter 33, but basically focuses 
on sodium restriction, lengthening the weekly dialysis 
time, and, if available, moving to a more frequent dialysis 
schedule. Use of whole-body bioimpedance to guide fluid 
removal has been shown to lower blood pressure. Abiding 
by a maximum UF rate and using this as an incentive to get 
patients to reduce interdialytic weight gain can also reduce 
blood pressure (Burkart, 2012).
While it is important to investigate and perhaps treat 
patients with very high levels of predialysis blood pressure, 
very aggressive approaches to reduce predialysis blood 
pressure have been associated with an increased rate of di-
alysis hypotension and access failure (see Chapter 33).
c. T emperature . The patient’s temperature should be mea-
sured. The presence of a fever prior to dialysis is a serious 
finding and should be investigated diligently. The mani-
festations of infection in a dialysis patient may be subtle. 
On the other hand, a rise in body temperature of about 
0.5°C during dialysis is normal and not necessarily a sign 
of infection or pyrogen reaction.
d. Access site. Whether or not fever is present, the vascular 
access site should always be examined for signs of infec-
tion before each dialysis.
2. During the dialysis session. Blood pressure and pulse rate are usu-
ally measured every 30–60 minutes. Any complaints of dizzi-
ness or of a washed-out feeling are suggestive of hypotension 
and should prompt immediate measurement of the blood 
pressure. Symptoms of hypotension may be quite subtle, and 
patients sometimes remain asymptomatic until the blood 
pressure has fallen to dangerously low levels.
B. Laboratory tests (predialysis values)
1. Serum urea nitrogen. This should be measured monthly as 
part of the URR. Whether the monthly postdialysis BUN 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   210 11/10/14   2:06 am
211Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
measurement can be dispensed with in units where in 
vivo dialyzer clearance is monitored using conductiv -
ity, or patient Kt/V is monitored via UV dialysate absor-
bance, is an open question. Use of the predialysis urea 
nitrogen would continue to be useful, as it allows for 
computation of the nPNA.
2. Serum albumin . The predialysis serum albumin level should 
be measured every 3 months. The serum albumin concen-
tration is an important indicator of nutritional state. A low 
serum albumin level is a very strong predictor of subsequent 
illness or death in dialysis patients. The increased mortal-
ity risk begins at serum albumin levels <4.0 g/dL (40 g/L). 
Patients with serum albumin levels <3.0 g/dL (30 g/L) are at 
high risk of morbid events, and every  effort should be made 
to find the cause of the low albumin value and correct it. 
3. Serum creatinine . The predialysis serum creatinine level 
is measured monthly. The usual mean value in hemodi-
alysis patients is  about 10 mg/dL (884 mcmol/L), with 
a common range of 5–15 mg/dL (440–1,330 mcmol/L). 
Paradoxically, in dialysis patients, high serum creatinine 
levels are associated with a low risk of mortality, prob-
ably because the serum creatinine value is an indicator 
of muscle mass and nutritional status.
The serum creatinine and urea nitrogen levels should 
be examined in tandem. If parallel changes in both  occur, 
then alteration in the dialysis prescription or degree of 
residual renal function should be suspected. If the serum 
creatinine level remains constant but a marked change 
occurs in the serum urea nitrogen value, the change in the 
latter is most likely due to altered dietary protein intake 
or altered catabolic rate of endogenous body proteins.
4. Serum total cholesterol . The serum total cholesterol level 
is an indicator of nutritional status. A predialysis value 
of 200–250 mg/dL (5.2–6.5 mmol/L) is associated 
with the lowest mortality risk in dialysis patients. Low 
 serum total cholesterol values, especially <150 mg/dL  
(3.9 mmol/L), are associated with an elevated mortality 
risk in dialysis patients, probably because they reflect 
poor nutritional status.
5. Serum potassium . Dialysis patients with a predialysis 
 serum potassium level of 5.0–5.5 mmol/L have the low-
est mortality risk. The mortality risk increases greatly for 
values over 6.5 and under 4.0 mmol/L.
6. Serum phosphorus. Measure monthly. The predialysis value 
associated with the lowest mortality is below 5.5 mg/dL 
(1.8 mmol/L). Mortality rates increase sharply for values 
over 9.0 mg/dL (2.9 mmol/L) and under 3.0 mg/dL (1.0 
mmol/L). Current KDIGO targets are to “lower serum 
phosphorus toward the normal range”. Serum phospho-
rus values tend to be slightly higher on Monday/Tuesday, 
that is, after the 3-day interdialytic interval.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   211 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
212
7. Serum calcium . Measure monthly (more often when
changing the dose of vitamin D). The lowest mortality is
 associated with values of 9–12 mg/dL (2.25–3.0 mmol/L). 
Mortality rates increase markedly at values over 12 mg/dL  
(3.0 mmol/L) and under 7 mg/dL (1.75 mmol/L). The tar-
get value should be a calcium within the normal range.
Targeting the upper range of normal serum calcium is no 
longer recommended, for fear of precipitating vascular
calcification.
8. Serum magnesium.   This is not routinely monitored in he -
modialysis patients. However, hypomagnesemia is com-
mon in hemodialysis patients receiving proton pump
inhibitors (Alhosaini, 2014), and low serum magnesium is 
associated with atrial fibrillation and poor cardiovascular 
outcome in many populations. The cost-benefits of rou-
tine periodic monitoring of serum magnesium have not
been studied. 
9. Serum alkaline phosphatase. Measure every 3 months. High
values are a sign of hyperparathyroidism or liver disease. 
High levels are associated with elevated mortality risk.
10. Serum bicarbonate . Measure monthly. Lowest mortal -
ity is for values between 20 and 22.5 mmol/L. Mortality
increases for both lower and higher values. Marked in-
creases in mortality are noted when the predialysis value 
is under 15 mmol/L. Predialysis acidosis can be cor -
rected by administration of alkali between dialyses.
11. Hemoglobin. This is checked at least monthly, and in
many cases every 2 weeks. Machine measurement of
 hemoglobin using optical sensors is becoming popu-
lar. Optimal management of chronic kidney disease
related anemia is discussed in Chapter 34. Spontane-
ously high hemoglobin levels (without erythropoietin
therapy) may be a sign of polycystic kidney disease,
acquired renal cystic disease, hydronephrosis, or renal
carcinoma. Serum ferritin levels, iron levels, and iron-
binding capacity, as well as erythrocyte indexes, should 
be checked every 3 months.
12. Serum aminotransferase values are usually checked monthly . 
High or even high-normal values may unmask silent liver 
disease, especially hepatitis or hemosiderosis. The blood 
should be screened for the presence of hepatitis B sur -
face antigen and for hepatitis C (see Chapter 35).
13. Serum parathyroid hormone levels should be checked every
3-6 months, as detailed in Chapter 36.
References and Suggested Readings
Alhosaini M, et al. Hypomagnesemia in hemodialysis patients: role of proton pump 
inhibitors. Am J Nephrol. 2014;39:204–209.
Cheung AK, et al. Effects of high-flux hemodialysis on clinical outcomes: results of the 
HEMO study. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003;14:3251–3263.
Daugirdas JT. Dialysis time, survival, and dose-targeting bias. Kidney Int. 2013;83:9–13.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   212 11/10/14   2:06 am
213Chapter 11 / Chronic Hemodialysis Prescription
Daugirdas JT. Dialysis dosing for chronic hemodialysis: beyond Kt/V. Semin Dial. 
2014;27:98–107.
Daugirdas JT, et al. Relationship between apparent (single-pool) and true (double-pool) 
urea distribution volume. Kidney Int. 1999;56:1928–1933.
Daugirdas JT. Second generation logarithmic estimates of single-pool variable volume 
Kt/V: an analysis of error. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1993;4:1205–1213.
Depner T, et al. Dialysis dose and the effect of gender and body size on outcome in the 
HEMO Study. Kidney Int. 2004;65:1386–1394.
Di Iorio B, et al. Dialysate bath and QTc interval in patients on chronic maintenance 
hemodialysis: pilot study of single dialysis effects. J Nephrol. 2012;25:653–660.
Eknoyan G, et al. Effect of dialysis dose and membrane flux in maintenance hemodi-
alysis. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:2010–2019.
European Best Practice Guidelines Expert Group. Haemodialysis. Nephrol Dial Trans-
plant. 2002;17(suppl 7):S16–S31.
FHN Trial Group. In-center hemodialysis six times per week versus three times per 
week. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2287–2300.
Fishbane S, et al. Role volume overload in dialysis-refractory hypertension. Am J  Kidney 
Dis. 1996;28:257–261.
Foley RN, et al. Long interdialytic interval and mortality among patients receiving 
 hemodialysis. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1099–1107.
Hanson JA, et al. Prescription of twice-weekly hemodialysis in the USA. Am J Nephrol. 
1999;19:625–633.
Hecking M, et al. Predialysis serum sodium level, dialysate sodium, and mortality in 
maintenance hemodialysis patients: the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns 
Study (DOPPS). Am J Kidney Dis. 2012;59:238–248.
Hecking M, et al. Significance of interdialytic weight gain vs. chronic volume overload: 
consensus opinion. Am J Nephrol. 2013;38:78–90.
Hsu HJ, et al. Association between cold dialysis and cardiovascular survival in hemo-
dialysis patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:2457–2464.
Jadoul M, et al. Modifiable practices associated with sudden death among hemodialy-
sis patients in the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study. Clin J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2012;7:765–774.
Kalantar-Zadeh K, et al. Twice-weekly and incremental hemodialysis treatment for 
initiation of kidney replacement therapy. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;64:181–186.
Karnik JA, et al. Cardiac arrest and sudden death in dialysis units. Kidney Int. 
2001;60:350–357.
Keen M, Janson S, Gotch F. Plasma sodium (CpNa) “set point”: relationship to inter -
dialytic weight gain (IWG) and mean arterial pressure (MAP) in hemodialysis pa-
tients (HDP) [Abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1997;8:241A.
Lacson, Jr, et al. Body size and gender dependent differences in mortality risks associ-
ated with ultrafiltration rates [Abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;25.
Lafrance J, et al. Predictors and outcome of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) calls 
in a large haemodialysis unit over a seven-year period. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2006;21:1006–1012.
Locatelli F, et al. Membrane Permeability Outcome (MPO) Study Group. Effect of 
membrane permeability on survival of hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2009;20:645–654.
Movilli E, et al. Association between high ultrafiltration rates and mortality in uraemic 
patients on regular haemodialysis: a 5-year prospective observational multicentre 
study. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007;22:3547–3552.
NKF-KDOQI clinical practice guidelines; update 2006. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2006;48(suppl 1):S2–S90.
Pirkle JL, et al. Effect of limiting maximum ultrafiltration rate in an in-center hemodi-
alysis population [Abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012:23:6A.
Pun PH, et al. Dialysate calcium concentration and the risk of sudden cardiac arrest in 
hemodialysis patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;8:797–803.
Saran R, et al. Longer treatment time and slower ultrafiltration in hemodialysis: as-
sociations with reduced mortality in the DOPPS. Kidney Int. 2006;69:1222–1228.
Tentori F, et al. Association of dialysate bicarbonate concentration with mortality in 
the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS). Am J Kidney Dis. 
2013;62:738–746.
Tentori F, et al. Longer dialysis session length is associated with better intermediate 
outcomes and survival among patients on in-center three times per week hemo-
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   213 11/10/14   2:06 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
214
dialysis: results from the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS). 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:4180–4188.
Termorshuizen F, et al for the NECOSAD Study Group. Relative contribution of resid-
ual renal function and different measures of adequacy to survival in hemodialysis 
patients: an analysis of the Netherlands Cooperative Study on the Adequacy of 
Dialysis (NECOSAD)-2. J Am Soc Nephrol .2004;15:1061–1070.
Twardowski ZJ. Safety of high venous and arterial line pressures during hemodialysis. 
Semin Dial. 2000;13:336–337.
Ward RA, et al. Dialysate flow rate and delivered Kt/Vurea for dialyzers with enhanced 
dialysate flow distribution. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:2235–2239.
Web References
HDCN adequacy channel: http://www.hdcn.com/ch/adeq/.
NKF KDOQI guidelines for hemodialysis adequacy: http://www.kidney.org.
Urea kinetics calculators: http://www.ureakinetics.org.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch011.indd   214 11/10/14   2:06 am