215
The most common complications during hemodialysis are, in de-
scending order of frequency, hypotension, cramps, nausea and vom-
iting, headache, chest pain, back pain, and itching.
 I. INTRADIALYTIC HYPOTENSION.  Intradialytic hypotension (IDH) is 
important not only because it can cause distressing symptoms, 
but because it is associated with poor long-term outcomes. Pa-
tients with IDH show increased mortality (Flythe, 2014) and also 
an increased rate of cardiac wall motion abnormalities during di-
alysis, the so-called myocardial stunning (McIntyre and Odudu, 
2014). There are various definitions for IDH, including a nadir 
(lowest) systolic BP less than 90 mm Hg, a fall in systolic BP of 20 
or 30 mm Hg, or a fall in some percentage of the starting blood 
pressure. For quality assurance purposes, a definition of nadir 
systolic BP less than 90 mm Hg might be most useful as this has 
the strongest association with increased mortality (Flythe, 2014). 
The incidence of IDH is highest in patients with low predialysis 
blood pressure. A low predialysis blood pressure may be a marker 
of cardiac disease, and hearts with functional or structural 
 abnormalities may be less able to compensate  hemodynamically 
for fluid removal. IDH is also associated with an increased risk of 
access thrombosis (Chang, 2011). Mechanistic causes of IDH are 
detailed in Table 12.1.
A. IDH related to blood volume changes . Volume-related causes of 
IDH are most important in that the blood pressure during 
hemodialysis normally does not decrease (beyond an initial, 
trivial amount) if fluid is not removed. Thus, any maneuver 
that slows the ultrafiltration rate, whether it be extending the 
weekly time on dialysis, reducing the weekly volume of fluid 
ingestion, or increasing the volume of urine excreted, should 
reduce the rate of IDH.
1. Avoid large interdialytic weight gains. Emphasizing salt restriction 
is far more effective in decreasing interdialytic weight gain
(IDWG) than focusing on fluid restriction (Tomson, 2001).
Observational data find an association between a higher
 sodium intake and poor outcome (McCausland, 2012).
Complications during 
Hemodialysis
Richard A. Sherman, John T.  
Daugirdas, and Todd S. Ing
12
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   215 09/10/14   1:12 am
216
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
2. Increasing weekly treatment time. Increasing weekly treatment 
time will, by definition, decrease the required ultrafiltra -
tion rate (same weight loss, longer time), and this  will 
decrease the frequency of IDH. The weekend long interdia-
lytic interval is associated with a higher IDWG; if the same 
postdialysis weight is targeted after the weekend, a higher 
ultrafiltration rate will, by definition,  need to be used to 
achieve it. In-center dialysis patients with fluid removal 
problems are often treated on a Mon-Wed-Fri-Sat schedule. 
This cuts out the long-weekend interdialytic interval and 
also increases the weekly dialysis time.
The KDOQI 2006 adequacy guidelines recommend 
that treatment time not be reduced below 3 hours ( for 
thrice-weekly dialysis) in patients with little or no residual 
urine output, regardless of how high their Kt/V may be. 
The European Best Practice Guidelines recommend that 
4 hours of therapy should be provided for all patients dia-
lyzed on a three-per-week schedule, regardless of body size. 
Increasing dialysis frequency without increasing weekly 
dialysis time does not always reduce IDH, although in one 
study the degree of myocardial stunning was reduced with 
short daily hemodialysis (Jeffries, 2011).
3. Maintaining and increasing urinary volume . In patients with 
 residual kidney function, the amount of urine volume 
 directly subtracts from the amount of fluid that needs to 
be removed during dialysis. Urine volume can be increased 
using diuretic therapy (Lemes, 2011).
1. Volume-related
a. Large weight gain (high ultrafiltration rate)
b. Short weekly dialysis time (high ultrafiltration rate)
c. Excessively low target (“dry”) weight
2. Inadequate vasoconstriction
a. High dialysis solution temperature
b. Autonomic neuropathy
c. Antihypertensive medications
d. Eating during treatment
e. Anemia
3. Cardiac factors
a. Diastolic dysfunction
4. Uncommon causes
a. Pericardial tamponade
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Occult hemorrhage
d. Septicemia
e. Dialyzer reaction
f. Hemolysis
g. Air embolism
Causes of Intradialytic Hypotension
12.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   216 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 217
4. Choose target weight carefully. A patient’s target weight or “dry 
weight” is usually chosen primarily on a clinical basis tak -
ing into account a patient’s blood pressure, presence of
edema, and tolerance of ultrafiltration to the chosen weight. 
The decision can be aided with the results of testing that
is slowly making its way into the clinic (e.g., bioimpedance
devices, measurement of serum atrial natriuretic factor lev-
els, relative blood volume monitors, and pulmonary ultra -
sound). The term “target weight” may be more appropriate
than “dry weight, ” because some level of volume overload is 
required in many patients to prevent IDH. This is because as 
the patient’s dry weight is approached, the rate at which the 
blood compartment refills from surrounding tissue spaces
is diminished. Patients who require high ultrafiltration
rates may be unable to reach their true dry weight because
the progressively slower refill rate as dialysis proceeds pro-
vokes transient hypovolemia at the end of treatment, often
accompanied by IDH cramps, dizziness, and postdialysis
malaise. More ominously, hypoperfusion of the heart, brain, 
and gut may have cumulative adverse consequences.
Intradialytic hematocrit monitors may help recog -
nize a dry weight that is too high. A “flat-line” hematocrit 
response (e.g., lack of an increase during dialysis) despite 
fluid removal indicates rapid blood compartment refilling 
and suggests fluid overload. However, a randomized trial 
in which these data were utilized clinically resulted (para-
doxically) in an increased, rather than a decreased, hospi -
talization rate (Reddan, 2005). Identification of a specific 
level of hemoconcentration (“crash-crit”) does not appear 
to be useful in avoiding IDH.
The use of multifrequency bioimpedance devices to 
adjust target postdialysis weight is growing in popularity. 
Reduction of fluid overload results in a lower prevalence 
of left ventricular hypertrophy, a finding that is strongly 
associated with poor outcome. Trying to aggressively re-
duce blood pressure without technological guidance has 
been associated with increased IDH (Davenport, 2008), 
and with an increased rate of access failure and cardiovas-
cular hospitalization (Curatola, 2011). Use of a multifre-
quency impedance monitor was associated with reduced 
blood pressure and left ventricular mass (Hur, 2013) with-
out 
 apparent side effects, although the rate of loss of urine 
 volume was  accelerated in the group using bioimpedance 
to lower target weight.
5. Use an appropriate dialysis solution sodium level . When the
 dialysis solution sodium level is less than that of plasma,
the blood returning from the dialyzer is hypotonic with
respect to the fluid in the surrounding tissue spaces. To
maintain osmotic equilibrium, water leaves the blood com-
partment, causing an acute reduction in the blood volume. 
Higher dialysis solution sodium levels limit the reduction in 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   217 09/10/14   1:12 am
218
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
blood volume accompanying ultrafiltration, but they also 
increase IDWG, blood pressure, and postdialysis thirst.
So-called sodium modeling (or sodium gradient dialy-
sis) is widely practiced. It generally involves use of a high 
dialysis solution sodium early in treatment (145–155 mM) 
with a progressive fall (linear, step, or logarithmic) to lower 
levels (135–140 mM) at the end of treatment. The 
 objective 
is to obtain the benefits of high-sodium dialysis solution 
without its complications. Review of the large literature on 
this subject shows that sodium modeling is of uncertain 
benefit (Stiller, 2001). It should also be noted that a patient’s 
postdialysis serum sodium is a function of a treatment’s 
time-averaged concentration of dialysis solution 
 sodium, 
not the terminal level of dialysis solution sodium.
Instead of a “one size fits all” level of dialysis solution so-
dium, using a fixed level set close to the patient’s predialysis 
serum value—an “individualized” dialysis solution 
 sodium—
may reduce symptoms as well as interdialytic thirst (Santos, 
2010). Recent data indicate that using a relatively high  di-
alysis solution sodium (>142 mmol/L) may benefit frail pa-
tients at high risk for IDH, likely because the consequences 
of recurrent IDH are more dire than those from 
 using a 
high-sodium dialysis solution (Marshall and Dunlop, 2012). 
On the other hand, use of a relatively low  dialysate sodium 
level can reduce IDH because it tends to lower IDWG and the 
need for ultrafiltration (Shah and Davenport, 2012).
6. Blood volume control devices with feedback loop . For a number
of years now, software has been allowing improved feed-
back control of ultrafiltration rate based on monitoring of
blood volume during dialysis. Some randomized trials sug-
gest that such feedback devices can reduce the incidence
of dialysis-induced hypotension while avoiding a positive
sodium balance (Davenport, 2011).
B. Hypotension related to lack of vasoconstriction . In the hypovolemic 
state, cardiac output is limited by cardiac filling; a reduction 
in either peripheral vascular resistance or cardiac filling in 
this setting can precipitate hypotension. Under conditions 
of decreased cardiac filling, increases in heart rate have little 
 effect on cardiac output. Because more than 80% of the total 
blood volume circulates in veins, changes in venous capacity 
can have important effects on a patient’s effective circulating 
blood volume and cardiac output. When arteriolar resistance 
decreases, more arterial pressure is transmitted to veins, 
causing passive stretching and distension, and an increased 
sequestration of blood. While not important in euvolemic 
patients given a vasodilator (because cardiac filling is more 
than adequate), this mechanism can result in hypotension 
when hypovolemia is present (Daugirdas, 1991). The degree 
of arteriolar constriction, or total peripheral resistance (TPR), 
is also important because TPR will determine the blood pres-
sure for any level of cardiac output.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   218 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 219
1. Lower dialysis solution temperature. Ideally, the dialysis solution 
temperature should be one that maintains a patient’s arte-
rial blood temperature at its initial level throughout dialy -
sis. When the dialysis solution temperature is higher than
this ideal level, cutaneous vasodilation occurs to allow heat 
to be dissipated. This vasodilation reduces vascular resis-
tance and predisposes the patient to hypotension. Blood
temperature modules are available for dialysis machines,
which can provide patients with a euthermic treatment.
Without such a device, the choice of dialysis solution tem-
perature is problematic, with even small (1.1°C) differences
in temperature having a notable impact on blood pressure
(Sherman, 1984). The widely used dialysis solution tem-
perature of 37°C is 
 almost always in excess of euthermic
values. Levels of 35.5°C–36.0°C are better initial choices,
with adjustment made up or down depending on tolerance
(chills) and 
 effectiveness (blood pressure). Cool dialysis
 solutions cause patient discomfort only when the dialysate
temperature is below the optimal (usually unknown) level;
euthermic dialysis is not associated with shivering and only 
rarely with chills (Maggiore, 2002). One group has favored
individualizing dialysis solution temperature at the patient
level. The tympanic membrane temperature is measured,
and the dialysis solution temperature is set 0.5°C below this 
level. This system of individualized cooling has been shown
to avoid the sensation of cold and chills commonly found
with simply lowering dialysate temperature to a given level
for all patients (Odudu, 2012). Individualized, cooled dialy-
sate is associated with a shorter postdialysis recovery time,
better maintenance of blood pressure, reduced myocardial
stunning, and less evidence of progressive ischemia-related
brain white matter damage (McIntyre, 2014).
A number of studies have found that hemodiafiltra-
tion is associated with a better tolerance to ultrafiltration 
and less IDH than hemodialysis. However, it appears that 
the beneficial effect of hemodiafiltration may have been 
due primarily to a lower extracorporeal circuit tempera-
ture due to the cooling effect of the replacement solution. 
When heat transfer from the extracorporeal circuit was 
kept constant, the hemodiafiltration advantage over he -
modialysis with regard to blood pressure was no longer 
found (Kumar, 2013).
2. Avoid intradialytic food ingestion in hypotension-prone patients . 
 Eating during hemodialysis can precipitate or accentuate
a fall in blood pressure (Sherman, 1988; Strong, 2001). The
effect is probably a result of dilation of resistance vessels
in the splanchnic bed, which reduces TPR and increases
splanchnic venous capacity (Barakat, 1993). The “food
 effect” on blood pressure probably lasts at least 2 hours.
 Patients who are prone to hypotension during dialysis
should avoid 
 eating just before or during a dialysis session.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   219 09/10/14   1:12 am
220
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
3. Minimize tissue  ischemia during dialysis.  During any type of 
hypotensive stress, the resulting tissue ischemia causes 
release of adenosine. Adenosine blocks release of nor -
epinephrine from sympathetic nerve terminals and also 
has intrinsic vasodilator properties. Severe hypotension 
can therefore amplify itself: Hypotension →  ischemia → 
 adenosine release →  impaired norepinephrine release →   
vasodilation → hypotension.
This may be one reason for the clinical observation 
that patients with low hematocrit levels (e.g., < 20%–25%) 
are very susceptible to dialysis hypotension (Sherman, 
1986). Few patients currently have levels of anemia severe 
enough to cause hypotension. Such patients may benefit 
from transfusion, although the current trend is to strongly 
discourage transfusion of acutely ill patients in an inten-
sive care setting. Use of nasal oxygen in hypotension-prone 
patients may be another way of limiting tissue ischemia 
and IDH (Jhawar, 2011).
4. Midodrine. Midodrine, an orally acting α -adrenergic ago -
nist, reduces the frequency of IDH. A dose of 10 mg orally  
1.5–2 hours before a dialysis session is typical, though use of 
as much as 40 mg has been reported. Supine hypertension 
is the major dose-limiting factor. Active cardiac ischemia 
(but not simply coronary artery disease) is a contraindi-
cation. Concomitant use of α -adrenergic blockers renders 
midodrine ineffective. No data exist as to whether the drug 
is especially useful in patients with autonomic  insufficiency 
(half of the dialysis population) as might theoretically be the 
case. One problem with midodrine is that its effect does not 
seem additive to that of using cool dialysate (Cruz, 1999).
5. Sertraline. At least three reports have indicated that 4 to  
6 weeks of therapy with the selective serotonin reuptake 
 inhibitor sertraline reduces the frequency of IDH. Some 
 evidence suggests that the drug improves autonomic 
 function (Yalcin, 2003). Like midodrine, sertraline was not 
shown to give added protection against IDH when cool 
 dialysate was used (Brewster, 2003).
6. Antihypertensive medication. Antihypertensive medications 
admi nistered prior to dialysis adversely impact the ability 
of the cardiovascular system to adjust to volume removal. 
Whether those with vasodilatory properties are more prob-
lematic than those with other mechanisms of action has 
not been well studied.
7. Dialysis fluid potassium level. A low concentration (1 mEq/L) 
of dialysis fluid potassium is associated with more frequent 
IDH, perhaps via autonomic effects. If otherwise possible, 
using higher potassium levels is advisable for hemody-
namic benefits as well as reduced arrhythmogenic effect.
8. Fludrocortisone. One preliminary report (Landry, 2011) found 
low random aldosterone levels in a group of five dialysis pa-
tients with low predialysis blood pressures and refractory 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   220 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 221
IDH. All had a normal cosyntropin test. Their blood pres-
sures improved with fludrocortisone treatment, ultrafil -
tration volumes increased, and rate of IDH was reduced. 
There was no improvement with fludrocortisone in hypo -
tensive patients with normal levels of adrenal hormones.
9. Vasopressin. Vasopressin levels normally increase with hypo-
tension, but in dialysis patients, the increase is often subopti-
mal. Vasopressin preferentially constricts splanchnic vessels, 
and such constriction may help to redistribute blood volume
centrally during fluid removal. In one study, vasopressin infu-
sion reduced the incidence of IDH (van der Zee, 2007).
C. Hypotension related to cardiac factors
1. Diastolic dysfunction. A stiff, hypertrophied heart is especially
prone to a reduction in output when there is even a minor re-
duction in filling pressure. Diastolic dysfunction is common
in dialysis patients owing to the effects of hypertension, coro-
nary artery disease, and probably uremia 
 itself. Some limited 
data suggest that using verapamil as an antihypertensive
agent may reduce the frequency of IDH in such patients.
2. Heart rate and contractility. Most, but not all, dialysis hypoten-
sion is associated with decreased cardiac filling, a setting
in which cardiac compensatory mechanisms can do little
to increase output. In some patients, TPR may fall ( owing 
to temperature effects, food ingestion, or tissue ischemia)
without a fall in cardiac filling. In this setting, impairment
of cardiac compensatory mechanisms can play a direct role 
in the development of hypotension.
3. Dialysis solution calcium. A dialysis solution calcium concen -
tration of 1.75 mM increases cardiac contractility and helps 
maintain intradialytic blood pressure better than a level of
1.25 mM, especially in patients with cardiac disease (van
der Sande, 1998). However, in the chronic outpatient set -
ting (as opposed to an intensive care unit), symptomatic
IDH is not less frequent with a higher-calcium dialysis
solution 
 (Sherman, 1986); use of high dialysis solution cal-
cium levels may contribute to vascular calcification, and
the trend is to not use them for prolonged periods. Dialysis 
solution magnesium levels may impact dialysis hypoten -
sion, but whether a higher or a lower level should be used is 
controversial (Chapter 10).
D. Unusual causes of hypotension during dialysis . Rarely, hypotension 
during dialysis may be a sign of an underlying, serious event. 
Causes are listed in Table 12.1.
E. Detection of hypotension . Most patients complain of feeling 
dizzy, light-headed, or nauseated when hypotension occurs. 
Some experience muscle cramps. Others may experience 
very subtle symptoms, which may be recognizable only to 
dialysis staff familiar with the patient (e.g., lack of alertness, 
darkening of vision); patients themselves are frequently quite 
aware of symptoms portending IDH. In some patients, there 
are no symptoms whatsoever until the blood pressure falls to 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   221 09/10/14   1:12 am
222
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
extremely low (and dangerous) levels. For this reason, blood 
pressure must be monitored on a regular basis throughout the 
hemodialysis session. Whether this is done hourly, half-hourly, 
or on a more frequent basis depends on the individual case.
F. Management of IDH . Management of the acute hypotensive epi -
sode is straightforward. The patient should be placed in the 
Trendelenburg position (if respiratory status allows this) and 
a bolus of 0.9% saline (100 mL or more, as necessary) should 
be rapidly administered through the blood line. The ultra-
filtration rate should be reduced to as near zero as possible. 
The patient should then be observed carefully. Ultrafiltration 
can be resumed (at a slower rate, initially) once vital signs 
have stabilized. As an alternative to saline, glucose, manni-
tol, or albumin solutions can be used to treat the hypotensive 
 episode; albumin is costly and offers little benefit over other 
approaches (Knoll, 2004); mannitol accumulates, reducing its 
benefit on subsequent treatments. IDH may respond  better 
to rapid administration of hypertonic saline (over 2  minutes) 
than to slower administration (5 minutes) of  (probably) an 
equivalent sodium load administered as 0.9% saline; the 
 tonicity-induced increase in vasopressin levels is the likely 
 basis for the differential effects (Shimizu, 2012). However, 
caution is advised if a high dialysis solution sodium is being 
used.  Nasal oxygen administration is not generally of ben -
efit during hypotensive episodes, though it may have value in 
 selected patients (Jhawar, 2011).
1. Slowing the blood flow rate . The practice of slowing the blood 
flow rate during IDH developed at a time when plate dialyz-
ers and acetate dialysis solution were in use and ultrafiltra-
tion control systems were not. The practice was believed 
to be beneficial because lower blood flow rates reduced 
(a) intradialyzer blood volume, (b) acetate (a vasodilator) 
transfer to the patient, (c) ultrafiltration rate, and (d) fistula 
“steal. ” The latter refers to the belief that lowering blood flow 
reduces access flow and allows systemic flow to increase, a 
concept that is very likely incorrect except in the setting of 
an intra-access stenosis (Trivedi, 2005). With current dialy-
sis practice, reduction of the blood flow rate to manage IDH 
is unlikely to be of any benefit. However, if hypotension is 
severe or unresponsive to stopping ultrafiltration and infu-
sion of volume expanders, blood pump rates may be tran-
siently reduced. Repeated slowing of the blood flow rate will 
reduce solute removal and cause underdialysis.
G. Prevention. One strategy to help prevent hypotension during 
 dialysis is given in Table 12.2.
 II. MUSCLE CRAMPS
A. Etiology. The pathogenesis of muscle cramps during dialysis is 
unknown. The four most important predisposing factors are 
hypotension, hypovolemia (patient below dry weight), high 
ultrafiltration rate (large weight gain), and use of low-sodium 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   222 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 223
dialysis solution. These factors all tend to favor vasoconstric -
tion, resulting in muscle hypoperfusion, leading to second-
ary impairment of muscle relaxation. Muscle cramps most 
commonly occur in association with hypotension, although 
cramps often persist after seemingly adequate blood pressure 
has been restored. The frequency of cramping increases loga-
rithmically with the weight loss requirements; weight losses of 
2%, 4%, and 6% have been associated with cramping frequen-
cies of 2%, 26%, and 49%, respectively.
Cramping is more common during the first month of dial-
ysis than in subsequent periods. It is more common in patients 
with a low cardiac index. Diagnostically obscure elevations in 
serum creatinine phosphokinase levels on routine monthly 
laboratory tests may result from intradialytic muscle cramp -
ing. Hypomagnesemia may cause treatment-resistant muscle 
cramping during dialysis. Hypocalcemia should also be con -
sidered as a potential cause, especially in patients treated with 
relatively low-calcium dialysis solution (1.25 mM) and calcium-
free phosphate binders and/or cinacalcet. Predialysis hypoka-
lemia will be exacerbated by the usual level of dialysis solution 
potassium (2 mM) and may precipitate cramping as well.
B. Management. When hypotension and muscle cramps occur 
concomitantly, both may respond to treatment with 0.9% sa-
line; however, it is not unusual for muscle cramps to persist. 
Hypertonic solutions (saline, glucose, mannitol) may be more 
effective in dilating muscle blood vessels. These solutions are 
1. Use a dialysis solution temperature of 35.5°C or individualize and set dialysis 
solution temperature at 0.5°C below the patient’s average predialysis tympanic 
membrane temperature.
2. Review dietary sodium intake and any other reasons for excess fluid intake. Fluid 
intake should ideally be <1 L per day in anuric patients. If predialysis serum 
sodium is low, consider the level of dialysis solution sodium versus serum sodium.
3. If substantial residual kidney function exists, consider increasing urine volume 
using diuretics.
4. Extend weekly dialysis time if ultrafiltration rate is >13 mL / kg per hour.
5. Consider raising the patient’s target weight.
6. In refractory cases, consider a trial of higher (140–145 mM) dialysis sodium, as 
tolerated, especially if a high IDWG is not a problem. If a high IDWG is present, 
consider cautiously lowering dialysis sodium level.
7. Give daily dose of antihypertensive medications after, not before, dialysis; 
change therapy to shorter-acting agents.
8. Assess the benefits of a predialysis hemoglobin level consistently = 10–11 g/dL 
(100–110 g/L).
9. Do not give food or glucose orally during, or immediately preceding, dialysis  
to hypotension-prone patients.
10. Consider use of a blood volume monitor.
11. Consider a trial of midodrine or sertraline.
12. Consider use of a higher (e.g., 3.0 mM) potassium dialysis solution if predialysis 
levels allow.
Strategy to Help Prevent Hypotension During Dialysis
12.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   223 09/10/14   1:12 am
224
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
more effective in the acute management of muscle cramps. 
Because the concentrated sodium load associated with hyper-
tonic saline administration can be problematic, hypertonic 
glucose administration is preferred for treatment of cramps in 
nondiabetic patients (Sherman, 1982). Mannitol may accumu-
late in dialysis patients, particularly when administered late 
in treatment—the usual time for the occurrence of cramps. 
 Nifedipine (10 mg) sometimes can reverse cramping. Though 
reportedly not causing a notable fall in blood pressure, nife-
dipine should be reserved for cramping in hemodynamically 
stable patients. Forced stretching of the muscle involved (e.g., 
ankle flexion for calf cramping) may provide relief. Massage 
varies in its utility on an individual basis.
C. Prevention. Prevention of hypotensive episodes will eliminate 
most cramping.
1. Stretching exercises . A program of stretching exercises tar -
geted at the affected muscle groups may be useful and 
should be the first-line treatment for both dialysis-related 
cramps and nocturnal cramps (Evans, 2013).
2. Dialysate sodium . The frequency of cramping is inversely 
related to the dialysis solution sodium level. Raising so -
dium levels to just below the threshold for induction of 
postdialysis thirst will be beneficial, and use of sodium 
gradient dialysis can definitely reduce cramps, although 
sometimes at the expense of increasing IDWG and blood 
pressure.
3. Dialysate magnesium. Avoiding low predialysis levels of mag-
nesium, calcium, and potassium may also be helpful. In one 
preliminary study, use of 0.5 mM (1 mEq/L) dialysis solu-
tion magnesium was associated with a lower incidence of 
cramps than when 0.375 mM (0.75 mEq/L) solution was 
used (Movva, 2011). Magnesium supplements have not been 
shown to be useful in nonuremic subjects, and magnesium 
should be given with great caution to dialysis patients. The 
use of Osvaren (calcium acetate/magnesium carbonate) as 
a phosphate binder compared with  sevelamer showed no 
change in the incidence of cramps.
4. Biotin. Biotin, in a dose of 1 mg per day, has been reported to 
improve intradialytic cramps, despite baseline serum levels 
being higher than in control subjects (Oguma, 2012). This 
study needs to be confirmed before biotin use can be more 
widely recommended.
5. Carnitine, oxazepam, and vitamin E . Carnitine supplementation 
of dialysis patients may reduce intradialytic muscle cramps 
(Ahmad, 1990) as may oxazepam (5–10 mg, given 2 hours 
prior to dialysis) and vitamin E. See Evans (2013) for a 
review.
6. Compression devices. A type of sequential compression device 
may be of benefit (Ahsan, 2004).
7. Quinine. Quinine sulfate before dialysis, though effective in pre-
venting intradialytic cramps, is now considered inadvisable 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   224 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 225
because of its association with thrombocytopenia, hypersen-
sitivity reactions, and QT prolongation. The FDA has issued a 
number of guidance documents aimed at counseling health 
professionals against use of quinine for leg cramps.
 III. NAUSEA AND VOMITING
A. Etiology. Nausea or vomiting occurs in up to 10% of routine 
dialysis treatments. The cause is multifactorial. Most epi-
sodes in stable patients are probably related to hypotension. 
Nausea or vomiting can also be an early manifestation of 
the disequilibrium syndrome described below. Both type A 
and type B varieties of dialyzer reactions can cause nausea 
and vomiting. Gastroparesis, very common in diabetes but 
also seen in nondiabetic patients, is exacerbated by hemo -
dialysis and may play a role in some patients. Contaminated 
or incorrectly formulated dialysis solution (high sodium, 
calcium) may cause nausea and vomiting as part of a con-
stellation of symptoms. Dialysis patients appear to develop 
nausea and vomiting more readily than other patients (e.g., 
with an upper respiratory infection, narcotic usage, hyper -
calcemia); dialysis may precipitate these symptoms in such 
a predisposing setting.
B. Management. The first step is to treat any associated hypoten-
sion. Vomiting may be particularly problematic when asso -
ciated with a hypotension-induced reduction in the level of 
consciousness owing to the risk of aspiration. Antiemetics can 
be administered for other causes of vomiting as needed.
C. Prevention. Avoidance of hypotension during dialysis is of prime 
importance. Persistent symptoms unrelated to hemodynam -
ics may benefit from metoclopramide. Sometimes a single 
predialysis dose of 5–10 mg is sufficient.
 I V. HEADACHE
A. Etiology. Headache occurs in as many as 70% of patients dur -
ing dialysis; its cause is largely unknown. It may be a subtle 
manifestation of the disequilibrium syndrome (see section VII, 
below). In patients who are coffee drinkers, headache may be 
a manifestation of caffeine withdrawal as the blood caffeine 
concentration is acutely reduced during the dialysis treat -
ment. Dialysis may precipitate migraine headaches in those 
with a history of the disorder. With atypical or particularly 
severe headache, a neurologic cause (particularly a bleeding 
event precipitated by anticoagulation) should be considered.
B. Management. Acetaminophen can be given during dialysis.
C. Prevention. Decreasing dialysis solution sodium may also be help-
ful in patients being treated with high sodium levels. A cup of 
strong coffee may help prevent (or treat) caffeine withdrawal 
symptoms. Patients suffering from headache during dialysis may 
be magnesium deficient (Goksel, 2006). A cautious trial of mag-
nesium supplementation may be indicated, keeping in mind the 
risks of giving magnesium to patients with renal failure.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   225 09/10/14   1:12 am
226
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
 V. CHEST PAIN AND BACK PAIN. Mild chest pain or discomfort (often as-
sociated with some back pain) occurs in 1%–4% of dialysis treat -
ments. The cause is unknown. There is no specific management 
or prevention strategy, though switching to a different variety of 
dialyzer membrane may be of benefit. The occurrence of angina 
during dialysis is common and must be considered in the differ -
ential diagnosis, along with numerous other potential causes of 
chest pain (e.g., hemolysis, air embolism, pericarditis). The man-
agement and prevention of angina is discussed in Chapter 38.
 VI. ITCHING. Itching, a common problem in dialysis patients, is some-
times precipitated or exacerbated by dialysis. Itching appearing 
only during the treatment, especially if accompanied by other 
minor allergic symptoms, may be a manifestation of low-grade 
hypersensitivity to dialyzer or blood circuit components. More 
often than not, however, itching is simply present chronically, 
and is noticed in the course of the treatment while the patient 
is forced to sit still for a prolonged period of time. Viral (or drug-
induced) hepatitis and scabies should not be overlooked as 
 potential causes of such itching.
Chronically, general moisturizing and lubrication of the skin 
using emollients is recommended, and this should be the first line 
of therapy. One should make sure that dialysis is adequate, and 
that a Kt/V of at least 1.2 and possibly higher is being delivered, 
though the evidence that higher Kt/V improves pruritus is not 
strong. Pruritus is often found in patients with elevated serum cal-
cium or phosphorus levels and/or substantially elevated parathy-
roid hormone (PTH) level; reductions in phosphorus, calcium (to 
the lower end of the normal range), and PTH levels are indicated.
Standard symptomatic treatment using antihistamines is 
useful. Gabapentin (or pregabalin), UVB (ultraviolet light B) ther-
apy, oral charcoal, or nalfuralfine might be the next line of ther -
apy, followed by naltrexone or tacrolimus ointment (Figure 12.1) 
 (Mettang and Kremer, 2014).
 VII. DISEQUILIBRIUM SYNDROME
A. Definition. The disequilibrium syndrome is a set of systemic and 
neurologic symptoms often associated with characteristic elec-
troencephalographic findings that can occur either during or 
following dialysis. Early manifestations include nausea, vomit-
ing, restlessness, and headache. More serious manifestations 
include seizures, obtundation, and coma (see also Chapter 40).
B. Etiology. The cause of the disequilibrium syndrome is contro-
versial. Most believe it is related to an acute increase in brain 
water content. When the plasma solute level is rapidly lowered 
during dialysis, the plasma becomes hypotonic with respect 
to the brain cells, and water shifts from the plasma into brain 
tissue. Others incriminate acute changes in the pH of the cere-
brospinal fluid during dialysis as the cause of this disorder.
The disequilibrium syndrome was a much larger problem 
two or more decades ago, when acutely uremic patients with 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   226 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 227
very high serum urea nitrogen values were commonly subjected 
to prolonged dialysis. However, milder forms of the syndrome 
may still occur in long-term dialysis patients, manifesting as nau-
sea, vomiting, or headache. The full-blown disequilibrium syn-
drome, including coma and/or seizures, can still be precipitated 
when an acutely uremic patient is dialyzed too energetically.
C. Management
1. Mild disequilibrium. Symptoms of nausea, vomiting, restless-
ness, and headache are nonspecific; when they occur, it is 
difficult to be certain that they are due to disequilibrium. 
Treatment is symptomatic. If mild symptoms of disequilib-
rium develop in an acutely uremic patient during dialysis, 
the blood flow rate should be reduced to decrease the effi-
ciency of solute removal and pH change, and consideration 
FIGURE 12.1 Algorithm to manage pruritus. UVB = ultraviolet light B. (Reproduced with 
permission from Mettang T, Kremer AE. Uremic pruritus. Kidney Int. 2014).
Weak
Severe
Persisting
Persisting
Persisting
and
Kt/V < 1.2
Kt/V > 1.2
Exclusion of other causes for pruritus
Moisturing ointment/oil bath
Consider kidney transplantation
or orNaltrexone Tacrolimus ointment (Electro-) acupuncture
Assessment of severity
of pruritus
Moisturing ointment/
oil bath
Quality of dialysis
(Kt/V )
Increase dose
of dialysis
or or or Nalfurafine
2.5–5.0 mg p.o
UVB
phototherapy
Charcoal
(6 g/day)
Gabapentin
100–300 mg
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   227 09/10/14   1:12 am
228
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
should be given to terminating the dialysis session earlier 
than planned. Hypertonic sodium chloride or glucose solu-
tions can be administered as for treatment of muscle cramps.
2. Severe disequilibrium . If seizures, obtundation, or coma oc-
cur in the course of a dialysis session, dialysis should be 
stopped. The differential diagnosis of severe disequilib-
rium syndrome should be considered (see Chapter 40). 
Treatment of seizures is discussed in Chapter 40. The man-
agement of coma is supportive. The airway should be con-
trolled and the patient ventilated if necessary. Intravenous 
mannitol may be of benefit. If coma is due to disequilib-
rium, then the patient should improve within 24 hours.
D. Prevention
1. In an acute dialysis setting . When planning dialysis for an 
acutely uremic patient, one should not prescribe an overly 
aggressive treatment session (see Chapter 10). The target 
reduction in the plasma urea nitrogen level should initially 
be limited to about 40%. Use of a low-sodium dialysis solu-
tion (more than 2–3 mM less than the plasma sodium level) 
may exacerbate cerebral edema and should be avoided. In 
hypernatremic patients, one should not attempt to correct 
the plasma sodium concentration and the uremia at the 
same time. It is safest to dialyze a hypernatremic patient 
initially with a dialysis solution sodium value close to the 
plasma level and then to correct the hypernatremia slowly 
postdialysis by administering 5% dextrose.
2. In a chronic dialysis setting . The incidence of disequilibrium 
syndrome can be minimized by use of a dialysis solution 
with a sodium concentration of at least 140 mM. Intra-
dialytic symptom frequency has been shown to be simi -
lar with a dialysate glucose concentration of 200 versus  
100 mg/dL (11 vs. 5.5 mM) (Raimann, 2012). Using a high 
dialysis solution sodium concentration (145–150 mM) 
that declines over the course of treatment for patients has 
been advocated in this setting: the initially high dialysis 
solution sodium results in a rising plasma sodium that 
may counteract the osmotic effects of the initially rapid 
removal of urea and other solutes from plasma. There is 
evidence that use of this approach reduces the incidence 
of disequilibrium-type intradialytic symptoms, but it may 
increase IDWG and blood pressure because of diffusive 
entry of sodium from dialysis solution to blood during the 
treatment session.
 VIII. DIAL YZER REACTIONS . This is a broad group of events that includes 
both anaphylactic and less well-defined adverse reactions of un-
known cause (Jaber and Pereira, 1997). In the past, many of these 
reactions were grouped under the term “first-use” syndrome be-
cause they presented much more often when new (as opposed 
to reused) dialyzers were employed. However, similar reactions 
occur with reused dialyzers, and we now discuss them under the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   228 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 229
more general category used here. There appear to be two variet -
ies: an anaphylactic type (type A) and a nonspecific type (type B). 
The occurrence of type B reactions appears to have diminished 
considerably during the past several decades.
A. Type A (anaphylactic type)
1. Manifestations. When a full-blown, severe reaction occurs, the 
manifestations are those of anaphylaxis. Dyspnea, a sense of 
impending doom, and a feeling of warmth at the fistula site 
or throughout the body are common presenting symptoms. 
Cardiac arrest and even death may supervene. Milder cases 
may present only with itching, urticaria, cough, sneezing, 
coryza, or watery eyes. Gastrointestinal manifestations, 
such as abdominal cramping or diarrhea, may also occur. 
Patients with a history of atopy and/or with eosinophilia 
are prone to develop these reactions. Symptoms usually be-
gin during the first few minutes of dialysis, but onset may 
 occasionally be delayed for up to 30 minutes or more.
2. Etiology
a. Ethylene oxide. Most type A (anaphylactic) reactions in 
the past were due to hypersensitivity reactions to eth-
ylene oxide, which was widely used by manufacturers 
to sterilize dialyzers. It tended to accumulate in the 
potting compound used to anchor the hollow fibers, 
hampering efforts to remove it by degassing prior to 
sale. These reactions were observed exclusively dur -
ing first use of dialyzers. Manufacturers currently 
use a variety of methods of sterilization (gamma 
 radiation, steam, electron beam) , and when ethylene 
oxide is used, little residual compound is left in the 
dialyzers. As a result, ethylene oxide reactions are now 
uncommon.
b. AN69-associated reactions. These were initially reported in 
patients dialyzed with the AN69 (acrylonitrile- sodium 
methallyl sulfonate) membrane who were also taking 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. The 
reactions are thought to be mediated by the bradyki-
nin system. The negatively charged AN69 membrane 
activates the bradykinin system with the effects mag-
nified because ACE inhibitors block bradykinin inacti-
vation. Plasma bradykinin levels, higher at baseline in 
patients treated with AN69 dialyzers, rise substantially 
during reactions. The bradykinin effect should be less 
pronounced with angiotensin receptor blockers than 
with ACE inhibitors (Ball, 2003). It is unclear to what 
extent ACE inhibitor–associated reactions occur with 
other PAN (polyacrylonitrile)-based membranes or 
with other non–PAN-based membranes.
c. Contaminated dialysis solution. Type A dialyzer reactions 
may be accounted for in some instances by dialysis 
solution contamination with high levels of bacteria 
and endotoxin, particularly with the use of high-flux 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   229 09/10/14   1:12 am
230
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
dialyzers. Such reactions are likely to occur promptly 
(within 2 minutes) of initiating dialysis; complement-
mediated reactions are more delayed (15–30 minutes) in 
onset. Fever and chills are particularly common symp-
toms with these reactions. The higher the bacteria and 
endotoxin levels are, the greater the risk is of a reaction.
d. Reuse. Clusters of anaphylactic-type dialyzer reactions 
have occurred in a reuse setting. The problem has often 
been linked to inadequate dialyzer disinfection during 
the reuse procedure, but in many cases the cause is un-
known. Half of Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC) investigations of outbreaks of bacteremia or 
pyrogenic reactions in dialysis patients over a 20-year 
period were ascribed to dialyzer reuse problems (Roth 
and Jarvis, 2000).
e. Heparin. Heparin has occasionally been associated with 
allergic reactions, including urticaria, nasal conges-
tion, wheezing, and even anaphylaxis. When a patient 
seems to be allergic to a variety of different dialyzers re-
gardless of the sterilization mode, and dialysis solution 
contamination also has been reasonably excluded, a 
trial of heparin-free dialysis or citrate anticoagulation 
should be considered. Low-molecular-weight hepa-
rins are not a safe substitute in such patients owing to 
cross-reactivity with heparin, which may result in ana-
phylactic reactions.
f. Complement fragment release . Acute increases in pulmo-
nary artery pressure have been documented in both 
animals and humans during dialysis with unsubsti -
tuted cellulose membranes. However, there is no good 
evidence that complement activation causes type A 
dialyzer reactions. Several studies have found no dif-
ference in type A reaction rates between membranes 
that readily activate complement (cuprophane) and 
those that do not (polysulfone, AN69).
g. Eosinophilia. Type A reactions tend to occur more read-
ily in patients with mild to moderate eosinophilia. 
Very severe reactions to dialysis or plasmapheresis 
were reported in patients with very high eosinophil 
counts; these were thought to be due to sudden eosin-
ophil degranulation with release of bronchoconstric -
tive and other mediators.
3. Management. Identifying the actual cause of a dialyzer reaction 
frequently is not possible. It is safest to stop dialysis imme-
diately, clamp the blood lines, and discard the dialyzer and 
blood lines without returning the contained blood. Immediate 
cardiorespiratory support may be required. According to the 
severity of the reaction, treatment with intravenous antihis-
tamines, steroids, and epinephrine can be given.
4. Prevention. For all patients, proper rinsing of dialyzers prior 
to use is important to eliminate residual ethylene oxide and 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   230 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 231
other putative allergens. In a patient with a history of type A 
reaction to an ethylene oxide–sterilized dialyzer, the dialyzer 
type can be changed to a γ -irradiated, steam-sterilized, or 
electron beam–sterilized dialyzer (see Table 4.1). The neces-
sity of using non–ethylene oxide–sterilized blood lines when 
switching to a dialyzer sterilized by some alternate method 
has not been established. For patients whose mild type A 
symptoms persist following a switch to equipment free of 
ethylene oxide, predialysis administration of antihistamines 
may be of benefit. Placing the patient on a reuse program and 
subjecting even new dialyzers to the reuse procedure prior to 
first use may be of benefit because of enhanced washout of 
potential noxious substances or allergens. Changing or stop-
ping heparin, trying a less complement-activating mem-
brane, and substituting an angiotensin receptor–blocking 
agent for an ACE inhibitor may also be tried. A role for latex 
exposure during dialysis initiation in a sensitized patient 
should be considered as well.
B. Nonspecific type B dialyzer reactions
1. Symptoms. The principal manifestations of a type B reac-
tion are chest pain, sometimes accompanied by back pain. 
Symptom onset is usually 20–40 minutes after starting di-
alysis. Typically, type B reactions are much less severe than 
type A reactions.
2. Etiology. The cause is unknown. Complement activation has 
been suggested to be a culprit, but its etiologic role in the 
development of these symptoms is uncertain. Chest and 
back pain may occur less frequently with reused dialyzers 
than with new dialyzers, though this is controversial. Any 
beneficial effects may be due to increased biocompatibility 
from protein coating of the membrane (not seen with bleach 
reprocessing) or to washout of potentially toxic substances 
from the dialyzer. Other causes of chest and back pain must 
be excluded, and the diagnosis of a type B dialyzer reaction 
is one of exclusion. In particular, subclinical hemolysis must 
be ruled out. A syndrome of acute respiratory distress as-
sociated with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia has been 
described (Popov, 1997), which may superficially resemble a 
type B dialyzer reaction.
3. Management. Management is supportive. Nasal oxygen 
should be given. Myocardial ischemia should be consid-
ered, and angina pectoris, if suspected, can be treated as 
discussed in Chapter 38. Dialysis can usually be continued, 
as symptoms invariably abate after the first hour.
4. Prevention. Trying a different dialyzer membrane may be of 
value.
 IX. HEMOL YSIS . Acute hemolysis during dialysis may be a medical 
emergency.
A. Manifestations: The symptoms of hemolysis are back pain, 
tightness in the chest, and shortness of breath. A dramatic 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   231 09/10/14   1:12 am
232
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
deepening of skin pigmentation may occur. Common are 
a port-wine appearance of blood in the venous blood line, a 
pink discoloration of the plasma in centrifuged blood samples, 
and a marked fall in the hematocrit. If massive hemolysis is 
not detected early, then hyperkalemia can result owing to re-
lease of potassium from the hemolyzed erythrocytes, leading 
to muscle weakness, electrocardiographic abnormalities, and, 
ultimately, cardiac arrest.
B. Etiology. Acute hemolysis has been reported in two primary set-
tings: (a) an obstruction or narrowing in the blood line, catheter, 
or needle or (b) a problem with the dialysis solution. The possibil-
ity of hemolysis induced by the combination of G6PD deficiency 
and predialysis quinine sulfate therapy should be considered.
1. Blood line obstruction/narrowing. Kinks may develop in the ar -
terial blood line (Sweet, 1996). An epidemic of hemolysis 
also has been reported owing to manufacturing defects in 
the link between the dialyzer outlet blood line and the ve-
nous air trap chamber (CDC, 1998). Hemolysis (usually sub-
clinical) may also appear when blood flow rate is high and 
relatively small needle sizes are used (De Wachter, 1997). 
Routine blood line pressure monitoring will call attention 
to many, but not all, such problems.
2. Problems with dialysis solution. These are as follows:
a. Overheated dialysis solution
b. Hypotonic dialysis solution (insufficient concentrate-to-
water ratio)
c. Dialysis solution contaminated with formaldehyde, 
bleach, chloramine ( from city water supply), copper 
( from copper piping), fluoride, nitrates ( from water sup-
ply), zinc, or hydrogen peroxide (see Chapter 5).
C. Management. The blood pump should be stopped immediately 
and the blood lines clamped. The hemolyzed blood has a very 
high potassium content and should not be reinfused. One should 
be prepared to treat the resultant hyperkalemia and possible 
drop in hematocrit. The patient should be  observed carefully, 
and hospitalization should be considered. Delayed hemolysis of 
injured erythrocytes may continue for some time after the di-
alysis session. Severe hyperkalemia may  occur, and this may re-
quire additional dialysis or other measures (e.g.,  administration 
of an Na/K ion exchange resin by mouth or  rectum) to control. 
A complete blood count, reticulocyte count, and levels of hap-
toglobin, free hemoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and 
methemoglobin should be obtained. Dialysis solution water 
(chloramine, nitrates, metals) and, if reprocessed, the dialyzer 
(residual sterilant) need to be assessed as well.
D. Prevention. Unless the problem is an obstruction in the blood 
path or faulty roller pump causing excessive blood trauma, the 
cause of the hemolysis must be assumed to be in the dialysis 
solution, and samples of dialysis solution must be investigated 
to determine the cause.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   232 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 233
 X. AIR EMBOLISM. Air embolism is a potential catastrophe that can 
lead to death unless detected and treated quickly.
A. Manifestations
1. Symptoms. These depend to an extent on the position of the 
patient. In seated patients, infused air tends to migrate 
into the cerebral venous system without entering the heart, 
causing obstruction to cerebral venous return, loss of con-
sciousness, convulsions, and even death. In recumbent 
patients, the air tends to enter the heart, generate foam in 
the right ventricle, and pass into the lungs, producing dys-
pnea, cough, and chest tightness and arrhythmias. Further 
passage of air across the pulmonary capillary bed into the 
left ventricle can result in air embolization to the arteries 
of the brain and heart, with acute neurologic and cardiac 
dysfunction.
 2. Signs. Foam is often seen in the venous blood line of the 
dialyzer. If air has gone into the heart, a peculiar churning 
sound may be heard on auscultation.
B. Etiology. The predisposing factors and possible sites of air entry 
have been discussed in Chapter 4. The most common sites of 
air entry are the arterial needle, the prepump arterial tubing 
segment, and an inadvertently opened end of a central venous 
catheter.
C. Management. The first step is to clamp the venous blood line 
and stop the blood pump. The patient is immediately placed 
in a recumbent position on the left side with the chest and 
head tilted downward. Further treatment includes cardiore -
spiratory support, including administration of 100% oxygen by 
mask or endotracheal tube. Aspiration of air from the atrium 
or ventricle with a percutaneously inserted needle or cardiac 
catheterization may be needed if the volume of air warrants it.
D. Prevention. See Chapters 4 and 10.
 XI. OTHER COMPLICA TIONS: Arrhythmia and cardiac tamponade are 
discussed in Chapter 38. Severe disequilibrium syndrome, sei-
zures, and intracerebral bleed are discussed in Chapter 40.
References and Suggested Readings
Ahmad S, et al. Multicenter trial of L-carnitine in maintenance hemodialysis patients. 
II. Clinical and biochemical effects. Kidney Int. 1990;38:912–918.
Ahsan M, et al. Prevention of hemodialysis-related muscle cramps by intradialytic use 
of sequential compression devices: a report of four cases. Hemodial Int. 2004;8:283–
286.
Brewster UC, et al. Addition of sertraline to other therapies to reduce dialysis-associated 
hypotension. Nephrology (Carlton). 2003;8:296–301.
Brunet P , et al. Tolerance of haemodialysis: a randomized cross-over trial of 5-h versus 
4-h treatment time. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1996;11(suppl 8):46–51.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Multistate outbreak of hemolysis 
in hemodialysis patients. JAMA. 1998;280:1299.
Chang TI, et al. Intradialytic hypotension and vascular access thrombosis. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2011;22:1526–1533.
Che-yi C, et al. Acupuncture in haemodialysis patients at the Quchi acupoint for refrac-
tory uremic pruritus. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2005;20:1912–1915.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   233 09/10/14   1:12 am
234
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
Cruz DN, et al. Midodrine and cool dialysis solution are effective therapies for symp-
tomatic intradialytic hypotension. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;33:920–926.
Curatola G, et al. Ultrafiltration intensification in hemodialysis patients improves 
hypertension but increases AV fistula complications and cardiovascular events.  
J Nephrol. 2011;24:465–473.
Davenport A. Using dialysis machine technology to reduce intradialytic hypotension. 
Hemodial Int. 2011;15:S37.
Davenport A, et al. Achieving blood pressure targets during dialysis improves control 
but increases intradialytic hypotension. Kidney Int. 2008;73:759–764.
Daugirdas JT. Dialysis hypotension: a hemodynamic analysis. Kidney Int . 1991;  
39:233–246.
Daugirdas JT, Ing TS. First-use reactions during hemodialysis: a definition of subtypes. 
Kidney Int. 1988;24:S37–S43.
De Wachter DS, et al. Blood trauma in plastic haemodialysis cannulae. Int J Artif 
 Organs. 1997;20:366–370.
Evans EC. Hemodialysis-related cramps and nocturnal leg cramps—what is best 
 practice? Nephrol Nurs J. 2013;40:549–553.
Evans RD, Rosner M. Ocular abnormalities associated with advanced kidney disease 
and hemodialysis. Semin Dial. 2005;18:252–257.
Flythe J, et al. Association of mortality risk with various definitions of intradialytic 
hypotension. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014; in press.
Franssen CFM. Adenosine and dialysis hypotension. Kidney Int. 2006;69:789–791.
Geller AB, et al. Increase in post-dialysis hemoglobin can be out of proportion and 
unrelated to ultrafiltration. Dial Transplant. 2010:39:57
Goksel BK, et al. Is low blood magnesium level associated with hemodialysis head -
ache? Headache. 2006;46:40–45.
Gunal AL, et al. Gabapentin therapy for pruritus in hemodialysis patients: a random-
ized placebo-controlled, double-blind trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004;19:3137–
3139.
Gwinner W , et al. Life-threatening complications of extracorporeal treatment in 
 patients with severe eosinophilia. Int J Artif Organs. 2005;28:1224–1227.
Herrero JA, et al. Pulmonary diffusing capacity in chronic dialysis patients. Respir Med. 
2002;96:487–492.
Huang CC, et al. Oxygen, arterial blood gases and ventilation are unchanged during 
dialysis in patients receiving pressure support ventilation. Respir Med. 1998;92:534.
Hur E, Usta M, Toz H, et al. Effect of fluid management guided by bioimpedance spec-
troscopy on cardiovascular parameters in hemodialysis patients: a randomized 
controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;61:857–965.
Jaber BL, Pereira JBG. Dialysis reactions. Semin Dial. 1997;10:158–165.
Jansen PH, et al. Randomised controlled trial of hydroquinine in muscle cramps. 
 Lancet. 1997;349:528.
Jefferies HJ, et al. Frequent hemodialysis schedules are associated with reduced levels 
of dialysis-induced cardiac injury (myocardial stunning). Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2011;6:1326–1332.
Jhawar N, et al. Effect of oxygen therapy on hemodynamic stability during hemodialy-
sis with continuous blood volume and O 2 saturation monitoring [abstract]. J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 2011;22:812A.
Kimata N, et al. Pruritus in hemodialysis patients: results from the Japanese Dialysis 
Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (JDOPPS). Hemodial Int. 2014;18:657–67.
Kitano Y, et al. Severe coronary stenosis is an important factor for induction and 
lengthy persistence of ventricular arrhythmias during and after hemodialysis.  
Am J Kidney Dis. 2004;44:328–336.
Knoll GA, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of albumin versus saline for the treat-
ment of intradialytic hypotension. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004;15:487–492.
Ko MJ, et al. Narowband ultraviolet B phototherapy for patients with refractory urae-
mic pruritus: a randomized controlled trial. Br J Dermatology. 2011;165:633.
Krieter DH, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions during hemodialysis in sheep are ACE inhib-
itor dose-dependent and mediated by bradykinin. Kidney Int. 1998;53:1026–1035.
Kumar S, et al. Haemodiafiltration results in similar changes in intracellular water and 
extracellular water compared to cooled haemodialysis. Am J Nephrol. 2013;37:320–324.
Landry DL, Hosseini SS, Osagie OJ, et al. Aldosterone deficiency as the cause of intradi-
alytic hypotension and its successful management with fludricortisone [abstract]. 
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;22:94.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   234 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 12 / Complications during Hemodialysis 235
Lemes HP , et al. Use of small doses of furosemide in chronic kidney disease pa-
tients with residual renal function undergoing hemodialysis. Clin Exp Nephrol. 
2011;15:554–559.
Lemke H-D, et al. Hypersensitivity reactions during haemodialysis: role of complement 
fragments and ethylene oxide antibodies. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1990;5:264.
Locatelli F, et al.; The Italian Cooperative Dialysis Study Group. Effects of different 
membranes and dialysis technologies on patient treatment tolerance and nutri-
tional parameters. Kidney Int. 1996;50:1293–1302.
Maggiore Q, et al. The effects of control of thermal balance on vascular stability in 
 hemodialysis patients: results of the European randomized clinical trial. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 2002;40:280–290.
Marshall MR, Dunlop JL. Are dialysate sodium levels too high? Semin Dial. 2012;25:277.
McCausland FR, et al. Increased dietary sodium is independently associated with greater 
mortality among prevalent hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int. 2012;82:204–211.
McIntyre CW , Odudu A. Hemodialysis-associated cardiomyopathy: a newly defined 
disease entity. Semin Dial. 2014;27:87–97.
Mettang T, Kremer AE. Uremic pruritus. Kidney Int. 2014.
Movva S, Lynch PG, Wadhwa NK. Interaction of potassium, sodium with higher mag-
nesium dialysate on muscle cramps in chronic hemodialysis patients [abstract].  
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011; 22:810A.
Najafabadi MM, et al. Zinc sulfate for relief of pruritus in patients on maintenance 
hemodialysis. Ther Apher Dial. 2012;16:142.
Narita I, et al. Etiology and prognostic significance of severe uremic pruritus in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int. 2014;69:1626–1632.
Odudu A, et al. Rationale and design of a multi-centre randomised controlled trial of 
individualised cooled dialysate to prevent left ventricular systolic dysfunction in 
haemodialysis patients. BMC Nephrol. 2012;13:45.
Oguma S, et al. Biotin ameliorates muscle cramps of hemodialysis patients: a prospec-
tive trial. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2012;227:217–223.
Parker TF, et al. Effect of the membrane biocompatibility on nutritional parameters in 
chronic hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int. 1996;49:551–556.
Parnes EL, Shapiro WB. Anaphylactoid reactions in hemodialysis patients treated with 
the AN69 dialyzer. Kidney Int. 1991;40:1148.
Pegues DA, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions associated with reuse of hollow-fiber hemo-
dialyzers and ACE inhibitors. Kidney Int. 1992;42:1232.
Poldermans D, et al. Cardiac evaluation in hypotension-prone and hypotension-  
resistant dialysis patients. Kidney Int. 1999;56:1905–1911.
Popov D, et al. Pseudopulmonary embolism: acute respiratory distress in the syndrome 
of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Am J Kidney Dis. 1997;29:449–452.
Raimann JG, et al. Metabolic effects of dialyzate glucose in chronic hemodialysis: 
 results from a prospective, randomized crossover trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2012;27:1559–1568.
Reddan DN, et al. Intradialytic blood volume monitoring in ambulatory hemodialysis 
patients: a randomized trial. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:2162–2169.
Ritz E, et al. Cardiac changes in uraemia and their possible relationship to cardiovas-
cular instability on dialysis. Nephrol Dial Transpl. 1990;5:93–97.
Roth VR, Jarvis WR. Outbreaks of infection and/or pyrogenic reactions in dialysis 
 patients. Semin Dial. 2000;13:92–96.
Santos SFF, Peixoto AJ. Sodium balance in maintenance hemodialysis. Semin Dial. 
2010;23:549
Sav MY, Sav T, Senocak E, et al. Hemodialysis-related headache. Hemodial Int. 2014.
Selby NM, McIntyre CW . A systematic review of the clinical effects of reducing dialy-
sate fluid temperature. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2006;21:1883–1898.
Seukeran D, et al. Sudden deepening of pigmentation during haemodialysis due to 
severe haemolysis. Br J Dermatol. 1997;137:997–999.
Shah A, Davenport A. Does a reduction in dialysate sodium improve blood pressure 
control in haemodialysis patients? Nephrology (Carlton). 2012;17:358–363.
Sherman RA, et al. Effect of variations in dialysis solution temperature on blood 
 pressure during hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 1984;4:66–68.
Sherman RA, et al. The effect of dialysis solution calcium levels on blood pressure dur-
ing hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 1986;8:244–227.
Sherman RA, et al. The effect of red cell transfusion on hemodialysis-related hypoten-
sion. Am J Kidney Dis. 1988;11:33–35.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   235 09/10/14   1:12 am
236
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
Sherman RA, et al. Postprandial blood pressure changes during hemodialysis. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 1988;12:37–39.
Shimizu K, et al. Vasopressin secretion by hypertonic saline infusion during 
 hemodialysis: effect of cardiopulmonary recirculation. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2012;27:796–803.
Silver SM, et al. Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome (DDS) in the rat: role of the “reverse 
urea effect. ” Kidney Int. 1992;42:161–166.
Steuer RR, et al. Reducing symptoms during hemodialysis by continuously monitoring 
the hematocrit. Am J Kidney Dis. 1996;27:525–532.
Stiller S, et al. A critical review of sodium profiling for hemodialysis. Semin Dial. 
2001;14:337–347.
Straumann E, et al. Symmetric and asymmetric left ventricular hypertrophy in 
 patients with end-stage renal failure on long-term hemodialysis. Clin Cardiol . 
1998;21:672–678.
Sweet SJ. Hemolytic reactions mechanically induced by kinked hemodialysis lines. Am 
J Kidney Dis. 1996;27:262–266.
Tomson CRV . Advising dialysis patients to restrict fluid intake without restrict-
ing  sodium intake is not based on evidence and is a waste of time. Nephrol Dial 
 Transplant. 2001;16:1538–1542.
Trivedi H, et al. Effect of variation of blood flow rate on blood pressure during hemo-
dialysis. ASN Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:39A.
Van der Sande FM, et al. Effect of dialysis solution calcium concentration on intra-
dialytic blood pressure course in cardiac-compromised patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 
1998;32:125–131.
Van der Zee S, et al. Vasopressin administration facilitates fluid removal during 
 hemodialysis. Kidney Int. 2007;71:318–324.
Wikström B, et al. Kappa-opioid system in uremic pruritus: multicenter, random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical studies. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2005;16:3742–3747.
Yalcin AU, et al. Effect of sertraline hydrochloride on cardiac autonomic dysfunction 
in patients with hemodialysis-induced hypotension. Nephron Physiol. 2003;93:  
P21–P28.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch012.indd   236 09/10/14   1:12 am