237
A dialysis facility may use dialyzers for the same patient for  multiple 
treatments. Dialyzer reuse can be a safe and effective practice. 
As  the  cost of high-flux, biocompatible dialyzers has come down, 
prevalence of reuse in the United States has fallen from 78% of 
 facilities in the mid-1990s to about 50% of facilities (47% of patients) 
in 2013 (Upadhyay, 2007; Neumann, 2013). Only hollow-fiber dialyz-
ers,  labeled by the manufacturer for multiple use, may be reprocessed.
 I. REPROCESSING TECHNIQUE. T o use a dialyzer multiple times, the di-
alysis unit must meticulously follow the standards set out by the 
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation 
(ANSI/AAMI RD47:2002/A1:2003). These AAMI standards are in-
corporated in the Medicare ESRD Facility Conditions for Coverage 
(ESRD Interpretive Guidance, V304–V368). Some of the text and 
language in the Medicare conditions differs from the text and lan-
guage in the AAMI document; however, the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services (CMS) holds the facility accountable for the 
text and language in the AAMI document.
While it is possible to accomplish safe and effective repro-
cessing using a manual technique, the preponderance of repro-
cessing is done with automated equipment. Several types of 
automated machines are now manufactured. Some machines 
provide the ability to process multiple dialyzers simultaneously. 
With automated methods , the cleansing cycles are reproduc-
ible and a variety of quality control tests measuring total cell 
volume (TCV) ( fiber bundle volume +  volume in the headers), 
ultrafiltration coefficient, and the ability of the reused dialyzer to 
hold a pressure applied to the blood compartment are built in. 
 Automated equipment also facilitates printing of dialyzer labels 
and computerized analysis of records and testing results.
Any medical director wishing to use a manual system must 
validate each step of the process and design appropriate quality con-
trol steps and audits to assure adherence and consistency. On the 
other hand, any automated equipment used must have a U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) 510(k) clearance. (A 510[k] is a pre-
market submission made to FDA to demonstrate that the device to 
be marketed is at least as safe and effective as; that is, substantially 
Dialyzer Reuse
Peter B. DeOreo
13
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   237 09/10/14   1:12 am
238
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
equivalent to, a legally marketed device that is not subject to pre-
market approval.) It is incumbent on the medical director using au-
tomated equipment to follow the manufacturer’s directions for use.
Reprocessing can be divided into three phases: pre–first-use, 
the dialysis treatment, and postdialysis.
A. Pre–first-use. T he dialyzer is recorded into inventory, assigned 
to a patient (at which time it is indelibly labeled with patient 
name, noting whether  there are any similarly named patients 
in the dialysis unit). Prior to initial use, the dialyzer is pre-
processed to measure the baseline TCV . During preprocess-
ing, the dialyzer is rinsed, pressure-tested, and filled with a 
germicide.
B. The dialysis treatment. P rior to allowing a reprocessed dialyzer to 
be used on a patient, the patient care provider (PCP) should in-
spect the dialyzer to be sure that it is not discolored, leaking, or 
showing significant clotting of fibers in the header. The facility 
medical director should establish a definition of “significant 
clotting” to guide staff. Peracetic acid has no vapor pressure 
and depends on direct contact to be effective; if peracetic acid 
was used to disinfect the dialyzer, the PCP must assure that a 
sufficient volume of disinfectant fluid was present in the dia-
lyzer to assure direct contact. This is done by examining the 
air-fluid level in the headers when the dialyzer is held horizon-
tally: both headers should be at least two-thirds full. The PCP 
must confirm that there is germicide in the dialyzer, that the 
contact time of the dialyzer with the germicide exceeds the 
minimum number of hours required for that particular germi-
cide, and that the dialyzer has passed all the required perfor -
mance tests. The presence of germicide is confirmed by using 
a test strip of appropriate sensitivity. The PCP then primes the 
dialyzer with normal saline and starts a recirculating rinse, 
with minimal ultrafiltration, at a blood compartment recircu-
lating flow rate of at least 200 mL/min, while flowing dialysate 
through the dialysate compartment at 500 mL/min or more. 
This rinse is continued for 15–30 minutes. It is important to 
avoid introducing air into the arterial circuit during this rins-
ing process, as any air trapped in the fibers or dialysate com-
partment may reduce the effectiveness of germicide removal. 
The dialyzer should be rotated at intervals during flushing to 
release trapped air in the dialysate compartment. After the 
rinse, the PCP must assure that the dialyzer, extracorporeal 
circuit, and saline bag are free of residual germicide by use of a 
test strip of appropriate sensitivity.
After rinsing has been completed, if the start of the treat-
ment is delayed for some reason, before putting the patient on 
dialysis, the PCP should retest for a “rebound” of germicide 
caused by either the dialysate or saline flow being interrupted 
while the dialyzer is in standby. The medical director should set 
guidelines for the dialysis unit, specifying how long a dialyzer, 
once it has been set up for a patient, can sit on the machine 
before it is deemed unsuitable for use without a repeat cycle 
of reprocessing.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   238 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 13 / Dialyzer Reuse 239
Before the PCP starts the treatment, two PCPs should per-
form a “time-out, ” during which they follow a checklist assuring 
that critical elements of the dialysis prescription are correctly 
set for this patient’s treatment. For reuse, the critical elements 
are that this dialyzer is for this patient, that it is the correct 
model dialyzer, that it had the appropriate contact time with 
the germicide, that it is now free of germicide, and that infor -
mation on the reprocessing label confirms that the dialyzer is 
safe to use. If possible, it is desirable that the patient participate 
in this step. Both PCPs should sign off on the safety checklist.
C. Postdialysis. A t the end of a treatment, the PCP returns the blood 
in the dialyzer to the patient in such a way as to minimize the 
amount of blood left in the dialyzer. The PCP or the reuse staff 
transports the dialyzer to the reprocessing area, making sure 
that the dialyzer ports are capped and that there is no cross-
contamination with other dialyzers that are being transported 
at the same time. The dialyzer is then rinsed, cleaned, tested, 
disinfected, inspected, labeled, and stored until the next use. 
The medical director must validate any practices in the reuse 
process that are not explicitly described in the AAMI standards 
or the dialyzer manufacturer’s “directions for use. ”
1. Rinsing and reverse ultrafiltration postdialysis.  T o maintain the 
 patency of fibers and to minimize clotting after dialysis, 
blood can be returned with heparinized saline. Once the 
patient has been detached from the extracorporeal circuit, 
the PCP can add positive dialysate pressure to force re-
sidual blood from the fibers. If, after use, a dialyzer cannot 
be promptly reprocessed, the dialyzer should be refriger -
ated in a temperature-monitored container (avoiding freez-
ing) within 2 hours (AAMI RD47:2002). Facility practice as 
 approved by the medical director should set limits for how 
long the dialyzers can be refrigerated before being repro -
cessed or discarded.  Typically, this maximum time varies 
between 36 and 48 hours from the end of treatment. The staff 
may not refrigerate a dialyzer that has been exposed to rins-
ing with nonsterile RO (reverse osmosis) water; while AAMI 
standards do not require water used in rinsing to be sterile, 
once the blood compartment has been exposed to other than 
sterile fluids, the dialyzer must be promptly reprocessed.
2. Cleaning. T ypically, this is accomplished in two steps. The 
first involves an initial rinsing of the dialyzer and cleaning 
the headers with RO water. The second is to put the dia-
lyzer on a machine (or through a manual process) that fur-
ther rinses and cleans the fibers using one of a number of 
chemical cleaning agents.
a. W ater.  W ater used for rinsing and reprocessing must, at a 
minimum, meet AAMI standards. The current Medicare 
“conditions for coverage” (ESRD Interpretive Guidance, 
V176–V278, 2008; ANSI/AAMI RD52: 2004) requires ad-
herence to the AAMI standards current in 2008 when 
the conditions were published. In 2008, those stan-
dards specified a bacteria upper limit of < 200 cfu/mL  
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   239 09/10/14   1:12 am
240
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
(colony forming units/mL) and an endotoxin upper 
limit of < 2 eu/mL (endotoxin units/mL). The action 
levels were < 50 cfu/mL and < 1 eu/mL, respectively. 
These are the standards that Medicare surveyors will 
enforce.  However, in 2011, AAMI reduced the maxi-
mum allowable bacteria count in water to < 100 cfu/
mL and endotoxin to < 0.25 eu/mL with action levels 
of <50 cfu/mL and < 0.125 eu/mL,  respectively. The 
new stricter limits also call for use of more rigorous 
microbiologic techniques and longer incubation times 
to assess the bacterial colony forming unit count. As of 
2014, CMS has not revised the “conditions for coverage” 
to include these revised, more stringent, standards. The 
medical director approved policy and procedure should 
state explicitly what is meant by the phrase “ AAMI stan-
dard” water. At a minimum, water used must meet the 
standards in the Medicare “conditions of coverage. ”
b. Rinsing and reverse ultrafiltration. W hile this process may have 
been started with saline (heparinized or otherwise) while 
the dialyzer was still on the dialysis machine (see Section 
I.C.1), the most common practice is to put the dialyzer on a 
manifold that flushes AAMI standard water (see above dis-
cussion) through the blood and dialysate compartments 
for 20–30 minutes. During flushing, a positive pressure 
gradient from the dialysate to the blood compartments is 
maintained to help flush clots and plasma detritus from 
the blood circuit. The pressures in this manifold must not 
exceed those specified by the manufacturer’s directions for 
use to avoid rupturing or collapsing the hollow fibers.
During this cleaning step, staff inspect and clean the 
headers to remove lipids and clots. For dialyzers that do 
not have removable header caps, there are assist devices 
that use RO water to flush the headers. If the header caps 
are removable, they and the associated “O” rings can be 
removed, allowing a direct rinse of the exposed ends of 
the fiber bundle and potting compound.
Any procedure that invades the blood compartment 
risks cross-contamination. AAMI standard water, even as 
defined in the 2011 revision, is not sterile. If the procedure 
uses assist devices, it must specify that these devices be 
used on only one dialyzer before they are cleaned and 
soaked in an appropriate germicide. If the practice allows 
the removal of the header caps, they and their “O” rings 
must be exposed to a disinfectant (bleach or peracetic 
acid) before being replaced on the dialyzer. Staff must take 
care not to damage the end of the exposed fiber bundle. 
Failure to adhere to correct practices in the step of dialyzer 
header cleaning has frequently been the root cause of out-
breaks of  bloodstream infections and pyrogen reactions.
The current generation of reprocessing equipment 
is not able to effectively remove large amounts of clot and 
detritus from the fiber bundle or header. It is necessary 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   240 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 13 / Dialyzer Reuse 241
to subject the dialyzer to the precleaning steps described 
earlier. One novel machine for dialyzer reprocessing 
(ClearFluxTM, from the Novaflux corporation, Princ-
eton, NJ) does not require a precleaning with nonsterile 
fluids before reprocessing. With this particular machine, 
the first step in reprocessing is to run a mixture of com-
pressed air and a proprietary cleaning agent through the 
dialyzer; this mixture effectively removes clots from the 
dialyzer headers (Wolff, 2005).
c. Bleach. S odium hypochlorite (bleach), diluted to 0.06% or 
less, dissolves proteinaceous deposits that may occlude 
dialyzer hollow fibers. The bleach used should be free 
of dyes or scents and be listed by the EPA as suitable for 
cleaning and disinfection.
d. Peracetic acid. P eracetic acid (mixture of acetic acid and 
hydrogen peroxide) is the most commonly used clean-
ing agent (HICPAC, 2008). Peracetic acid is available in 
proprietary and generic versions. Peracetic acid may not 
completely remove proteins deposited on the dialyzer 
membrane.
3. T ests of dialyzer performance.  T hese check the integrity of 
the membrane, its clearance (TCV), and its ultrafiltration 
properties. The tests may be done manually or using auto-
mated techniques.
a. Pressure test for leaks.  A b lood path integrity test works 
by generating a pressure gradient across the membrane 
and observing for a pressure fall in either the blood or the 
 dialysate compartment. The gradient may be produced by 
instilling pressurized air or nitrogen into the blood side 
of the dialyzer or by producing a vacuum in the dialysate 
side. Only minimal amounts of air should be observed to 
leak through an intact wetted membrane; damaged fibers 
usually rupture when a transmembrane pressure gradient 
is applied. Leak tests also screen for defects in the dialyzer 
O-rings, potting compound, and end-caps.
b. Blood compartment volume.  T his test indirectly measures 
changes in membrane clearance for small molecules 
such as urea. The blood compartment volume (TCV) 
is measured by purging the filled blood compartment 
(header volume and fiber volume) with air and measur -
ing the volume of obtained fluid. Every dialyzer des-
tined for reprocessing should be processed before its 
initial use in order to measure a baseline TCV for that 
particular dialyzer. The change in TCV from baseline 
is then tracked by remeasuring TCV after each reuse. 
A reduction in TCV of 20% corresponds to a 10% re-
duction in urea clearance, the maximum decrease ac -
ceptable for continued use. In a given patient, repeated 
failure to reach a target number of reuses because of 
TCV test failures suggests excessive clot formation dur -
ing dialysis and should prompt a review of the heparin 
prescription.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   241 09/10/14   1:12 am
242
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
c. W ater permeability (in vitro K UF). Th e dialyzer ultrafiltra -
tion coefficient ( KUF; described in Chapter 3) measures 
water permeability but is also  an indirect measure of 
membrane mass transfer properties for larger molecular 
weight substances. The in vitro K UF can be measured by 
determining the volume of water passing through the 
membrane at a given pressure and temperature. Changes 
in KUF do not affect fluid removal during dialysis, as most 
dialysis being done today uses machines with automated 
ultrafiltration control that will compensate for even 
moderate decreases in water permeability with appropri-
ate adjustments in transmembrane pressure. However, a 
decrease in KUF usually is accompanied by a reduction in 
β2-microglobulin clearance.
d. Clinical confirmation. O nline, conductivity determined so-
dium or ionic clearance, which is comparable to urea 
clearance, or online measurement of other proxies of 
urea clearance are other acceptable methods of monitor-
ing dialyzer performance (AAMI RD47:2002). Such online 
clearance measurements are done during the dialysis 
treatment and require a process of record keeping to track 
and compare them with reuse numbers or TCV .
The facility QAPI (QAPI = Quality Assurance / Perfor-
mance Improvement) team can correlate the laboratory-
measured Kt/V with the reuse number across all patients 
in the dialysis unit, or it can investigate failures to deliver 
adequate Kt/V or URR as a function of reuse history in a 
given patient. The QAPI team must show that reuse is not 
adversely affecting dialysis efficiency.
4. Disinfection/sterilization. O nce cleaned, the dialyzer must 
undergo a chemical (germicide) or physical (heat) process 
that renders all living organisms inactive. High-level dis-
infection differs from sterilization in that the former may 
not destroy spores. High-level disinfection is all that cur -
rent standards require. Sterilization as defined legally is not 
easily accomplished in a dialysis facility.
a. Germicides. A fter a dialyzer has been cleaned and tested, 
germicides are instilled in both blood and dialysate 
compartments for an appropriate contact duration (see 
Section I.C.7). Peracetic acid is the most common ger -
micide used. The use of formaldehyde or glutaraldehyde 
has essentially disappeared, probably because there are 
no automated methods for dialyzer reprocessing using 
formaldehyde or glutaraldehyde, and because manual 
methods for aldehyde chemical reuse are burdensome, 
having to meet U.S. Occupational Safety and Health 
 Administration (OSHA) standards for safe handling, 
 attention to exposure limits, and surveillance and respi-
ratory testing for exposed staff.
b. Documenting the presence of germicide. T he presence of ger -
micide must be ensured through procedural controls 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   242 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 13 / Dialyzer Reuse 243
and should be verified both at the completion of repro-
cessing and prior to use (see Section I.B). The presence 
of peracetic acid is confirmed using test strips. If formal-
dehyde is used, FD&C (U.S. Food, Drugs & Cosmetic Act) 
blue dye can be put in the concentrated (37%) formalin 
to give the dialyzer a light blue color once the formalde-
hyde is diluted. In manual reprocessing systems, each 
dialyzer must be checked for the presence of germicide. 
In automated systems, only a sample needs to be tested 
each day.
c. Heat sterilization.  H eated 1.5% citric acid at 95°C (Levin, 
1995) or the original method of using heated water at 
105°C (Kaufman, 1992) are nonnoxious chemical alterna-
tives to disinfection. Laboratory studies have shown that 
with these methods of disinfection, spores are destroyed. 
Methods of disinfection using heat with or without citric 
acid are efficacious; however, they are somewhat cum-
bersome, as they are not available in automated form. 
Also, heat disinfection affects the durability of many 
types of dialyzers being reprocessed. Medical directors 
electing to use heat disinfection must demonstrate its 
effectiveness in their dialysis facility and need to design 
and implement appropriate quality control and auditing 
procedures.
5. Final inspection.  A t horough visual inspection of the dialyzer 
should be made by the reprocessing staff member at the 
end of a reprocessing procedure, and then again by the PCP 
when setting up the reprocessed dialyzer prior to the di-
alysis treatment. If the dialyzer does not meet the visual 
inspection standards (described in Section I.B), it should 
be sent for another cycle of reprocessing (e.g., if the germi-
cide volume is not adequate), or the dialyzer should be dis-
carded if it is damaged or unaesthetic in appearance.
6. Labeling. A fter the staff is satisfied that the dialyzer has 
passed performance testing and inspection, they should af-
fix a label to the dialyzer in a way that does not obscure the 
patient’s name or the manufacturer label. At a  minimum, 
the label should indicate the patient’s name, a warning 
 regarding the existence of a similar name in the unit, if 
applicable, the number of reuses, the baseline and cur -
rent TCV , the time and date the dialyzer was reprocessed, 
and whether the dialyzer passed performance testing. The 
same information and additional detail as indicated should 
be recorded in the reuse master file. If the dialyzer failed 
any tests and was discarded, this should be recorded. Such 
information provides data that  the QAPI team can use to 
assess the quality and consistency of the reuse program.
7. Storage. O nce inspected and labeled, the dialyzer must be 
stored in a manner that allows continued surveillance and 
management of multiple dialyzers assigned to the same pa-
tient. The temperature of the storage room is important, as 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   243 09/10/14   1:12 am
244
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
the recommended germicide contact time depends on stor-
age temperature. Peracetic acid has a shelf life of 14–21 days, 
and might be shorter in dialyzers with significant residual 
blood, as the interaction of residual blood with the perace-
tic acid reduces its concentration. For this reason, peracetic 
acid sterilized dialyzers should be re-disinfected every 14 
days. It is not certain how long a dialyzer (even with periodic 
re-disinfection) can safely be stored before it should be dis-
carded. The medical director should specify the time limit 
for re-disinfection and disposal of stored dialyzers.
 II. CLINICAL ISSUES. W hen reprocessing is performed in accordance 
with accepted standards and practices, the risks of the procedure 
are manageable. Performing in accordance with accepted stan -
dards is not without challenges. Reprocessing staff may be the 
least supervised staff in the dialysis facility. In some facilities, re-
processing is done off-site beyond the supervision of the facility 
staff. Results of Medicare surveys show numerous citations being 
issued related to failure to comply with the conditions and stan-
dards for dialysis reprocessing (Port, 1995). The decision to repro-
cess dialyzers is a risk versus benefit calculation that the medical 
director and governing body need to make (Upadhyay, 2007).
A. Clinical benefits, the argument for
1. Cost. T his issue is discussed later in the chapter in  
Section IV .B.
2. First-use reactions and complement activation. D ialyzer reactions 
characterized by restlessness, chest pain, coughing, dys-
pnea, hypoxemia, and hypotension appeared to be less fre -
quent when reprocessed dialyzers are used, although some 
patients demonstrate sensitivity to the membrane even with 
multiply reprocessed dialyzers. One source of these reactions 
is a membrane–blood interaction  (bio- incompatability) 
that results in the complement-mediated (alternative path-
way) sequestration of leucocytes in the pulmonary circula-
tion. During the use of a dialyzer, the dialyzer membrane 
becomes coated with proteinaceous material. Many repro-
cessing methods, especially those using peracetic acid, do 
not remove this protein coat during the cleaning phase, 
rendering the membrane more biocompatible during sub -
sequent use. Reprocessing a dialyzer with bleach has the 
effect of stripping off this proteinaceous coat, potentially re-
sulting in a less biocompatible dialyzer. Other reactions may 
be caused by a true IgE-mediated anaphylactoid reaction 
to residual ethylene oxide used to sterilize the dialyzer, and 
still other reactions may be due to uncharacterized compo-
nents leached from the dialyzer or blood lines. In the course 
of preprocessing and reprocessing, the dialyzer, ethylene ox-
ide, and other chemicals used during dialyzer manufacture 
are removed from the dialyzer, reducing their ability to leach 
into the patient during dialysis. However, the abandonment 
of unsubstituted cellulosic membranes, ethylene oxide 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   244 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 13 / Dialyzer Reuse 245
sterilization, and the development of more biocompatible 
synthetic membranes has markedly reduced the incidence 
of these reactions with single use, reducing the advantages 
of reprocessing in this area.
3. Biohazardous waste.  M ost dialysis providers have to pay a 
price for the disposal of biohazardous waste that is calcu-
lated on a per pound basis. Dialyzer reprocessing reduces 
the number of pounds of dialyzers and packaging included 
in that waste. This not only saves the dialysis provider 
money but also reduces the waste burden to the environ-
ment. On the other hand, there are environmental issues 
with reprocessing as well: energy as well as water are used 
in reprocessing, and the chemicals used to clean and dis-
infect the dialyzers are put into the waste stream and need 
to be dealt with by sewage treatment facilities. Some waste 
treatment authorities do not allow users to discharge form-
aldehyde into the waste water. The gloves, strips, masks, 
and gowns used in the reprocessing procedure also contrib-
ute to the waste burden (Hoenich, 2005; Upadhyay 2007).
B. Clinical concerns, the argument against
1. Formaldehyde. W hen formaldehyde was in widespread use, 
providers reported patients who developed anti-N antibod-
ies (Vanholder, 1988) and acute “formaldehyde reactions” 
characterized by burning at the needle site and itching dur-
ing dialysis in the access arm.
2. Morbidity and mortality. T his is the most contested aspect of 
dialyzer reuse. Most of the reuse outcomes studies were 
done during the era of cellulosic dialyzers at the beginning 
of the introduction of the more expensive more biocompat-
ible synthetic membranes. To date, the published studies 
have been observational with all of their associated poten-
tial for bias and confounding by indication. These earlier 
studies are not likely to be generalizable to current repro -
cessing practices. There have been no large prospective, 
randomized controlled trials of dialyzer reuse versus single 
use. In a systematic review (Galvao, 2012), the authors con-
cluded that there was no published evidence supporting 
an adverse effect on mortality of multiple use compared 
with single use. A recent study that included the large co-
hort of patients dialyzed at DaVita (Bond, 2011) showed no 
adverse effect of multiple use on mortality. A smaller study 
that followed a sample of patients in 23 Fresenius units 
who were converted from peracetic acid reprocessing to 
single use (Lacson, 2011) did show a decreased relative risk 
of mortality and a reduction in inflammatory markers after 
conversion to single use. Neither of these two studies was 
included in the systematic review of Galvao (2012).
In some early studies, reuse with formaldehyde was as-
sociated with better outcomes than reuse with peracetic acid 
(Held, 1994). Formaldehyde, with its vapor pressure, might be 
considered to provide a larger margin of safety than peracetic 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   245 09/10/14   1:12 am
246
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
acid, which depends on direct contact for disinfection. The 
FDA response to the initial studies was to require significant 
improvement of the directions for use of peracetic acid and 
more stringent quality control. Later observational trials in 
the Medicare database failed to show a difference in out -
comes between formaldehyde and peracetic acid (Collins, 
2004). This suggests that facilities using peracetic acid may 
have become better at reprocessing over time.
3. Potential bacterial/pyrogen contamination.  Bacteremia and  
pyrogen reactions can result from improperly processed 
dialyzers. Clusters of pyrogen reactions occur slightly more 
often in centers that reuse dialyzers. Clusters of bacteremia 
caused by gram-negative water-borne bacteria (Stenotro -
phomonas maltophilia, Burkholderia cepacia , or Ralstonia 
pickettii) are rarely if ever reported in single-use dialysis 
facilities, but outbreaks have been reported in facilities 
using dialyzer reprocessing. The true incidence of these 
outbreaks is not known, as they are unlikely to be reported 
unless of such a magnitude or persistence that state or fed-
eral health authorities are consulted. The source of such 
problems is generally the water used to rinse and clean the 
dialyzers and to prepare the germicides used for disinfec-
tion. Scrupulous attention to water treatment (disinfection, 
loop path, and flow  velocity) is required (Hoenich, 2003). 
Any step in the reprocessing procedure that introduces a 
foreign object and/or unsterile water into the blood com-
partment is a potential source of cross-contamination. 
Peracetic acid is less effective in dialyzers with substantial 
residual blood and protein. Bacteria sequestered in clotted 
fibers may not be exposed to the sterilant but can be dis-
lodged during the dialysis treatment.
4. Potential of anaphylactoid reactions with use of peracetic acid/
hydrogen peroxide/acetic acid reuse agents and angiotensin-  
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.  A n outbreak of anaphy-
lactoid reactions to reused dialyzers occurred in patients 
dialyzed with cuprammonium cellulose, cellulose acetate, 
and polysulfone dialyzers reprocessed with peracetic acid. 
Most were being treated with ACE inhibitors (Pegues, 
1992). Reuse of dialyzers with oxidizing agents, such as per-
acetic acid, can produce a strong negative charge on the 
protein-coated membrane and thereby activate factor XII, 
kininogen, kallikrein, and, subsequently, bradykinin. ACE 
inhibitor–induced inhibition of bradykinin degradation 
may potentiate the reaction. Similar reactions have been 
described with the use of polyacrylonitrile membrane and 
attributed to membrane-induced bradykinin generation. In 
another small case series, reactions in patients taking ACE 
inhibitors began when bleach was added to the reuse pro-
cedure and ceased when use of bleach was discontinued 
(Schmitter and Sweet, 1998). For patients with unexplained 
adverse reactions early in the treatment, it is appropriate to 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   246 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 13 / Dialyzer Reuse 247
review the medication list for ACE inhibitors, irrespective 
of reprocessing technique or germicide.
5. Bleach cleaning and dialyzer reactions. D uring normal dialysis, 
the dialyzer membrane becomes coated with a protein-
aceous material, which often has the effect of making the 
membrane more biocompatible. Reprocessing a dialyzer 
with bleach has the effect of stripping off this protein-
aceous coat, potentially resulting in a less biocompatible 
dialyzer.
6. Potential transmission of infectious agents. O f concern are hepa-
titis B (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), and human immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV). The current Medicare “conditions of 
coverage” require exclusion of patients with HBV from re-
use (V301) and instruct that they be dialyzed in a separate 
isolation room (V128). According to current Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommendations, 
patients with HIV may continue on a reuse program. HIV 
patients do not require dialysis in an isolation room. The 
medical director may wish to exclude HIV patients from re-
use to limit staff exposure to HIV-infected blood. Currently, 
CDC neither requires isolation nor proscribes reuse in pa-
tients with HCV . For HIV and HCV , CDC considers universal 
precautions adequate to protect staff and other patients.
7. Potential for decreased dialyzer performance
a. Urea clearance. A reused hollow-fiber dialyzer ultimately 
becomes less efficient as a portion of its capillaries become 
plugged with protein or clot from previous uses. However, 
as long as the fiber bundle volume is at least 80% of the 
baseline value, urea clearance remains clinically accept -
able. The HEMO study confirmed these data and found 
in a large number of patients using dialyzers reprocessed 
by different methods, that the decrease in urea clearances 
(Cheung, 1999) was, at most, modest. The HEMO study 
found that, independent of the reuse method, urea clear-
ance decreased 1.4%–2.9% over 20 uses.
1. Heparin dosing. T he reusability of dialyzers will deterio-
rate quickly unless adequate heparin anticoagulation 
is given. One group has reported increased numbers 
of reuses with individually targeted heparin dosing 
(Ouseph, 2000). Appropriate heparin dosing is no less 
important for single-use programs.
2. Bicarbonate dialysis solution containing citric acid.  Bicar-
bonate dialysate containing a small amount of citrate 
in place of acetate has been reported to result in in-
creased urea clearance in a reuse setting (Ahmad, 
2005; Sands, 2012). This observation may be related to 
calcium chelation by citrate coming in from the dialy-
sate at the membrane boundary layer, with perhaps 
reduced activation of clotting factors and platelets. 
This anticoagulant effect is also of potential benefit in 
single-use programs.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   247 09/10/14   1:12 am
248
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
b. β2-microglobulin clearance.  P rotein deposits adsorbed on 
the membrane or convectively transported to the mem -
brane surface and not removed by the reuse process may 
reduce the ultrafiltration rate and larger molecule clear-
ance. High-flux dialyzer performance with respect to  
β2-microglobulin clearance may be altered dramatically 
by reuse, depending on the type of membrane and type of 
reuse procedure (Cheung, 1999). Of most concern is the 
rapid falloff in β 2-microglobulin clearance when high-
flux cellulose dialyzers are reused with peracetic acid/
hydrogen peroxide/acetic acid without a bleach cycle. 
This loss of clearance with peracetic acid reuse does 
not occur with the use of the Novaflux reprocessing ma-
chine, where the use of the air-fluid two-phase cleaning 
system appears to maintain both water permeability and 
clearance of higher-molecular-weight molecules.
8. Albumin loss.  S ome dialyzers exposed to bleach during re-
use procedures may undergo an increase in permeabil-
ity to albumin that correlates with the number of reuses. 
This is most pronounced for dialyzers with very high water 
permeability.
 III. OTHER ISSUES
A. Regulatory aspects
1. US federal regulations. T here are guidelines for dialyzer reuse 
(NKF, 2007) that are useful for medical directors to review 
and consider in developing and/or managing a dialyzer re-
use program. The Medicare “conditions for coverage” that 
incorporate the AAMI standards (V304–V368, RD47:2002) 
are the controlling rules. The medical director is responsible 
for the decision to have a reprocessing program (V311). That 
decision should be reflected in the minutes of the governing 
body. The medical director is accountable for the training 
and competence of the staff performing reuse (V308 ff). The 
patient’s nephrologist must agree to and order reprocessing 
for his or her patient (V311). The medical director must sus-
pend reuse when there is a cluster of adverse patient events 
that could be attributed to the reuse program (V382). The 
reuse program should be the subject of ongoing review and 
monitoring by the facility QAPI team (V594, V626).
2. Manufacturer single-use recommendation.  B ecause of the pre-
vious widespread practice of reusing dialyzers labeled 
for single use only, the FDA developed guidelines that al-
low manufactures to label their dialyzers for multiple use, 
recommend an appropriate reuse method, and provide 
performance data of dialyzers over 15 reuses (FDA, 1995). 
Dialyzer manufacturers may choose to continue to label 
their dialyzers for single use only.
3. Reuse of other dialysis disposables.  M edicare conditions do 
not allow reuse of transducer protectors. Guidelines for 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   248 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 13 / Dialyzer Reuse 249
the reuse of blood tubing have been published (Reuse of 
hemodialyzers, AAMI, 2002). However, blood tubing reuse 
is permitted only when the manufacturer has developed a 
specific protocol that has been accepted by the FDA. Cur -
rently, no such product is available.
4. Informed consent. T here is no rule requiring informed consent 
as a condition for reprocessing dialyzers. The Medicare con-
ditions require that patients and their family (caregivers) be 
fully informed about all aspects of their care. For reuse, the 
facility should provide written information about the risks 
and benefits of reprocessing in language appropriate for the 
patient. The information should describe the rationale for 
the program. The patient should be invited to participate as 
fully as he or she is interested in assuring that the dialyzer is 
appropriately identified and safe for reuse.
B. Cost. T he strongest argument for multiple-use dialyzers is 
that cost savings enable the use of dialyzers that have higher 
mass transfer coefficients and that are more biocompatible. 
This argument is less compelling as the cost of efficient, high-
flux dialyzers has been reduced. Additionally, since the United 
States is the major market for dialyzers labeled for multiple 
use, manufacturers may choose not to go through the expense 
and requirements of certifying the dialyzer for multiple use 
just to satisfy the US market. This has the paradoxical effect of 
reducing the choices of dialyzers available to patients. When 
providers consider all the costs of reprocessing dialyzers, the 
difference may be small. While the initial cost of the multiple-
use dialyzer is more than the equivalent dialyzer labeled for 
single use, the average cost of the multiple-use dialyzer falls 
with each reuse. The true cost of the multiple-use dialyzer can-
not fall below the cost of reprocessing, no matter how many 
times it is used. The cost of reprocessing includes the wages 
and benefits for the reprocessing staff, the cost of training and 
documenting and maintaining competence. Providers must 
consider the capital cost and depreciation cost of the repro-
cessing equipment. Additionally, each reprocessing cycle con-
sumes electricity, water, cleaning chemicals, and germicides. 
Costs of test strips, routine cultures, and Limulus amebocyte 
lysate (LAL) tests for reuse water must also be factored in, as 
must the cost of the additional QAPI procedures necessary to 
maintain a safe and effective reuse program.
C. Quality assurance and performance improvement. T he reuse program 
must be part of the QAPI program under the accountability of 
the medical director (V594, V626). QAPI records must track 
staff training, continued staff competence, audits, validation, 
microbiology, average number of reuse, reasons for failure, ad-
verse events, patient complaints, and the root cause analysis of 
any event requiring the suspension of reuse. The requirements 
are detailed in the AAMI standards. The facility must maintain 
a history of the dialyzer from preprocessing to disposal.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   249 09/10/14   1:12 am
250
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
D. T raining.  A  comprehensive training course should be estab -
lished for all personnel performing reprocessing. Competence 
should be verified for each item on the curriculum. The medi-
cal director is accountable for the training program and com-
petent performance of the staff (V308 ff).
E. Personnel safety and physical plant considerations.  T he use of pro-
tective eyewear and clothing is stressed, as is proper handling 
of germicide spills. Where germicides are used, the workspace 
should be designed with air turnover at least equivalent to the 
clinical area with forced inward air and additional ceiling ex -
haust ducts, as well as ducts located lower toward the floor if 
formaldehyde is used. Exposure to germicides is regulated by 
OSHA. Current (1990) maximum allowable time-weighted aver-
age (TWA) exposure for formaldehyde is 1 ppm and for short-
term exposure is 3 ppm. Maximum exposure limits for hydrogen 
peroxide is 1 ppm TWA and for glutaraldehyde is 0.2 ppm. There 
are no current OSHA exposure limits for peracetic acid.
References and Suggested Readings
Ahmad S, et al. Increased dialyzer reuse with citrate dialysate. Hemodial lnt. 
2005;9:264–267.
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Reuse of Hemodialyzers. 
Washington, DC: American National Standards Institute; 2002. ANSI/AAMI RD47.
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Dialysate for Hemodi-
alysis. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumenta-
tion; 2004. ANSI/AAMI RD52.
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. AAMI Standards—  
Dialysis. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumen-
tation; 2011.
Bond TC, et al. Dialyzer reuse with peracetic acid does not impact patient mortality. 
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:1368–1374.
Charoenpanich R, et al. Effect of first and subsequent use of hemodialyzers on patient 
well being. Artif Organs. 1987;11:123.
Cheung A, et al. Effects of hemodialyzer use on clearances of urea and beta-2 micro-
globulin. The Hemodialysis (HEMO) Study Group. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1999;10:117–
127.
Collins AJ, et al. Dialyzer reuse-associated mortality and hospitalization risk in in-
cident Medicare haemodialysis patients, 1998–1999. Nephrol Dial Transplant . 
2004;19:1245–1251.
ESRD interpretive guidance. 2008. http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Provider-  
Enrollment-and-Certification/GuidanceforLawsAndRegulations/Downloads/
esrdpgmguidance.pdf.
Fan Q, et al. Reuse-associated mortality in incident hemodialysis patients in the United 
States, 2000–2001. Am J Kidney Dis. 2005;46:661–668.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Guidance for hemodialyzer reuse labeling.  U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, MD.  October 6, 1995.   http://www.fda 
.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/  
GuidanceDocuments/UCM078470.pdf.  Last accessed 08/04/2014.
Galvao F, et al. Dialyzer reuse and mortality risk in patients with end-stage renal dis-
ease: a systematic review. Am J Nephrol. 2012;35:249–258.
Gotch FA, et al. Effects of reuse with peracetic acid, heat and bleach on polysulfone 
dialyzers [Abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1994;5:415.
Hakim RM, Friedrich RA, Lowrie EG. Formaldehyde kinetics in reused dialyzers. Kidney 
Int. 1985;28:936.
Held PJ, et al. Analysis of the association of dialyzer reuse practices and patient out-
comes. Am J Kidney Dis. 1994;23:692–708.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   250 09/10/14   1:12 am
Chapter 13 / Dialyzer Reuse 251
HICPAC. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization in healthcare facilities. 2008. 
http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/disinfection_sterilization/13_06peraceticacidsterili
zation .html. Accessed March 3, 2014.
Hoenich NA, Levin R. The implications of water quality in hemodialysis. Semin Dial. 
2003;16:492–497.
Hoenich NA, Levin R, Pearce C. Clinical waste generation from renal units: implica-
tions and solutions. Semin Dial. 2005;18:396–400.
Kaplan AA, et al. Dialysate protein losses with bleach processed polysulfone dialyzers. 
Kidney Int. 1995;47:573–578.
Kaufman AM, et al. Clinical experience with heat sterilization for reprocessing dialyz-
ers. ASAIO J. 1992;38:M338–M340.
Kliger AS. Patient safety in the dialysis facility. Blood Purif. 2006;24:19–21.
Lacson E, et al. Abandoning peracetic acid-based dialyzer reuse is associated with 
improved survival. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:297–302.
Levin NW , et al. The use of heated citric acid for dialyzer reprocessing. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 1995;6:1578–1585.
Lowrie EG, et al. Reprocessing dialyzers for multiple uses; recent analysis of death risks 
for patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004;19: 2823–2830.
National Kidney Foundation task force on the reuse of dialyzers. Am J Kidney Dis.  
2007;30:859–871.
Neumann ME. Moderate growth for dialysis providers. Nephrol News and Issues. 
2013;27:18.
Ouseph R, et al. Improved dialyzer reuse after use of a population pharmacodynamic 
model to determine heparin doses. Am J Kidney Dis. 2000;35:89–94.
Pegues DA, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions associated with reuse of hollow fiber hemo-
dialyzers and ACE inhibitors. Kidney Int. 1992;42:1232–1237.
Pizziconi VB. Performance and integrity testing in reprocessed dialyzers: a QC update. 
In: AAMI, ed. AAMI Standards and Recommended Practices. Vol 3. Dialysis. Arling-
ton, VA: AAMI; 1990:176.
Port FK. Clinical outcomes in patients with reprocessed dialyzers. Paper presented at: 
National Kidney Foundation Symposium on Dialyzer Reprocessing; November 3, 
1995; San Diego, CA.
Rahmati MA, et al. On-line clearance: a useful tool for monitoring the effectiveness of 
the reuse procedure. ASAIO J. 2003;49:543–546.
Rancourt M, Senger K, DeOreo P . Cellulosic membrane induced leucopenia after 
 reprocessing with sodium hypochlorite. Trans Am Soc Artif Intern Organs. 
1984;30:49–51.
Sands JJ, et al. Effects of citrate acid concentrate (Citrasate®) on heparin requirements 
and hemodialysis adequacy: a multicenter, prospective noninferiority trial. Blood 
Purif. 2012;33:199–204.
Schmitter L, Sweet S. Anaphylactic reactions with the additions of hypochlorite to 
reuse in patients maintained on reprocessed polysulfone hemodialyzers and ACE 
inhibitors. Paper presented at: Annual Meeting of the American Society for Artifi-
cial Internal Organs; April 1998; New Orleans.
Vanholder R, et al. Development of anti-N-like antibodies during formaldehyde reuse 
in spite of adequate predialysis rinsing. Am J Kidney Dis. 1988;11:477–480.
Twardowski ZJ. Dialyzer reuse—part I: historical perspective. Semin Dial. 2006;19:41–53.
Twardowski ZJ. Dialyzer reuse—part II: advantages and disadvantages. Semin Dial. 
2006;19:217–226.
Upadhyay A, Sosa MA, Javer BL. Single-use versus reusable dialyzers: the known and 
unknowns. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007;2:1079–1086.
US Renal Data System. USRDS Annual Report. Bethesda, MD: USRDS; 2004.
Verresen L, et al. Bradykinin is a mediator of anaphylactoid reactions during hemodi-
alysis with AN69 membranes. Kidney Int. 1994;45:1497–1503.
Wolff, SW . Effects of Reprocessing on Hemodialysis Membranes [doctoral thesis in 
chemical engineering]. Department of Chemical Engineering, Pennsylvania State 
University College of Engineering; 2005.
Zaoui P , Green W , Hakim M. Hemodialysis with cuprophane membrane modulates 
interleukin-2 receptor expression. Kidney Int. 1991;39:1020.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch013.indd   251 09/10/14   1:12 am