305
16
Interest in home hemodialysis (HD) continues to grow. Provider and 
patient preferences, decreasing costs of equipment and consum -
ables, new funding models, and more user-friendly technology may 
be facilitating factors. Moreover, the home setting lends itself well to 
longer and more frequent (collectively, “intensive”) HD sessions than 
are typically available in-center, though these intensified regimens 
can be provided in-center as well. It is useful to distinguish between 
(a) conventional HD (3–5 hours, 3 per week), (b) frequent HD (5–7 per 
week), which can be frequent short (1.5–3 hours), frequent standard 
(3–5 hours), or frequent long (>5 hours), or (c) long-session-length 
regimens (>5 hours) given 3 days per week or every other day. Short 
and standard frequent HD are typically referred to as “daily HD” 
(DHD), while long, frequent HD is typically done at night and is called 
frequent “nocturnal HD” (NHD).
 I. MODALITY SELECTION.  In the absence of evidence-based practice 
guidelines addressing modality selection, we propose some gen-
eral guiding principles: (a) patients approaching renal replace -
ment therapy should receive education regarding all available 
modality options, including conservative care without dialysis, 
preemptive transplantation, home HD, peritoneal dialysis (PD), 
and in-center HD; (b) where medically appropriate and feasible, 
home modalities (including PD) should be promoted as first-line 
therapies when transplantation is not imminent; (c) the choice 
between PD and home HD should be based on patient preference, 
availability, feasibility, and medical factors (e.g., patients seeking 
pregnancy should preferentially receive frequent NHD; patients 
at risk for suboptimal clearance with PD should consider home 
HD); (d) home HD should be considered following the failure of 
PD or a renal allograft—this approach requires carefully timed 
education and planning, but can lead to more patients maintain-
ing their independence from center HD; and (e) more intensified 
(home or center) HD regimens may be considered to improve ex-
tracellular fluid volume (especially in those with high fluid gains), 
blood pressure (BP), left ventricular (LV) mass, phosphate, and 
quality of life.
Home and Intensive 
Hemodialysis
Gihad E. Nesrallah, Rita S. Suri, Robert 
M. Lindsay, and Andreas Pierratos
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   305 09/10/14   1:17 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
306
A. Frequent versus conventional HD.  P rescription patterns vary geo -
graphically, and also according to program and provider pref-
erences. There are no evidence-based guidelines that directly 
address the choice between conventional and frequent (long 
or short) HD. In the majority of cases, the treatment schedule 
will depend on patient preferences (such as convenience and 
noninterference with work, sleep, and social schedules), as well 
as clearance and ultrafiltration needs. Starting with one par -
ticular regimen does not preclude switching to another at any 
time, and many patients have used combinations of long and 
short treatments to accommodate work and other schedules. 
Where possible, we recommend avoiding a 3-day interdialytic 
interval, setting a lower boundary of every other day for home 
HD, though this approach is less likely to be available in-center.
B. Home HD
1. Patient selection. Reported prevalent rates for home HD are 
generally <5% in most jurisdictions, but as high as 15% in 
others. The primary prerequisite for home HD is a willing 
patient or partner who is able to learn to safely perform the 
dialysis procedure. Uncontrolled seizures, hypoglycemia, 
noncompliance with medical care, and significant intra -
dialytic hemodynamic instability requiring frequent nurs-
ing interventions are relative contraindications. Inability to 
use heparin precludes long HD with lower blood flow rates 
(e.g., 150 mL/min), but not prescriptions with higher (e.g., 
>300 mL/min) blood flow. The presence of multiple or se-
vere comorbidities are not contraindications to home HD, 
but frailty and inability to perform self-care HD may repre-
sent significant barriers if no assistance is available. Home 
HD programs should develop standardized intake proce-
dures, and criteria for home HD eligibility should  include 
the patient’s or helper’s motor skills, strength, vision, hear-
ing, reading ability, motivation, and adherence. When sig-
nificant functional barriers are identified, paid caregivers 
can be considered, if available.
2. Home environment suitability. The home needs to be assessed 
by a renal technologist, focusing on (a) water quantity 
and quality, (b) electrical supply, (c) storage space, and  
(d) cleanliness. These rarely pose insurmountable barriers 
to home dialysis, though the patient must understand the 
nature and extent of the changes needed in order to accom-
modate the necessary equipment. Local building codes 
should be adhered to, and, occasionally, permission from 
landlords must be sought prior to beginning any altera-
tions to plumbing and electrical infrastructure.
C. In-center HD. Reasons for choosing in-center over home-
based HD include (a) patient safety concerns, (b) vascular 
access or cannulation problems, (c) patient or partner inabil -
ity or unwillingness to perform the HD procedure at home,  
(d) unsuitable home environment (space, electrical, hygiene, 
or plumbing limitations), and (e) patient preference.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   306 09/10/14   1:17 am
307Chapter 16 / Home and Intensive Hemodialysis
While conventional regimens predominate in-center, 
intensified center HD is increasingly available, with practices 
varying by jurisdiction. In Canada, Australia, and Europe, 
DHD is offered for a wide range of indications, including (a) 
refractory volume overload, (b) refractory hyperphosphatemia 
and/or calciphylaxis, (c) failure to thrive, and (d) pregnancy, 
though evidence to support these indications is limited. In 
France, long, thrice-weekly, in-center, daytime HD is com -
mon, and long, thrice-weekly HD at night is becoming increas-
ingly available in the United States. Long, frequent NHD is not 
 usually done in-center. Transportation, proximity to the treat-
ment center, patient lifestyle, and demands on the patient's 
family are important factors that may determine whether in- 
center intensive HD is considered. In-center intensified regi -
mens also impose increased demands on space, equipment, 
and nursing and technical support staff. In general, programs 
require a “critical mass” of patients receiving intensified regi -
mens to maintain a pool of adequately trained staff and to re-
alize economies of scale. Lack of availability of overnight staff  
and ability to rapidly “turn over” larger numbers of DHD treat-
ments may require alternative staffing models.
 II. TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR HOME HD
A. Training. The length of the training period depends on the pa-
tient's previous experience with HD. Without prior experience, 
patients typically require one-on-one training with an experi -
enced nurse for at least 6 weeks to become safe and proficient, 
while patients previously undergoing self-care HD require less 
training time. Some programs with long wait times for home 
HD training offer training in self-care HD units. Educational 
manuals written in the patient's language at the appropriate 
reading and comprehension level are also useful. Many pro-
grams require patients to “recertify” annually, by demonstrat-
ing in the training unit setting that they are able to correctly 
perform the dialysis procedure and blood access, and trouble-
shoot effectively.
B. V ascular access.  The Canadian Society of Nephrology (CSN) 
guidelines for the management of patients with ESRD (end-
stage renal disease) treated with intensive HD (Nesrallah, 
2013) recommend arteriovenous (AV) fistulae and grafts over 
catheters, because of lower infection risk (conditional/weak 
recommendation, very low quality evidence), but acknowl -
edge that the technical demands of cannulation may repre -
sent a barrier to home HD for some patients.
In patients with AV fistulae, the “buttonhole” technique, 
which involves recannulation of precisely the same two (or two 
pairs of) sites with blunt needles, has been popular as it may be 
easier to learn than the standard, “rope-ladder” (rotating site), 
method (see Chapter 6). However, buttonhole cannulation 
may result in higher rates of Staphylococcus aureus  bactere -
mia (Muir, 2014), and as such, the CSN guidelines recommend 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   307 09/10/14   1:17 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
308
using the buttonhole method in conjunction with topical an -
timicrobial prophylaxis with mupirocin (conditional/weak 
recommendation, very low quality evidence) (Nesrallah, 2010, 
2013). With synthetic grafts, needle sites are rotated in the 
usual fashion. Low blood flows of 200–250 mL/min and single 
needle are sufficient for NHD, where high dialysis efficiency is 
not required.
C. Dialysis membranes. Currently, there are no data to support the 
use of one kind of dialysis membrane over another in home 
HD. In recent years, most centers have reported using high-
flux dialyzers. Low dialyzer surface area can be acceptable for 
long HD (Pierratos, 1999). Dialyzer reuse has been described 
in home dialysis (Pierratos, 2000) but has largely been aban-
doned with the fall in prices of dialysis membranes. 
D. Patient safety and precautions.  Appropriate patient selection, 
training, and ongoing supervision are of utmost importance 
to ensure patient safety at home. The dialysis machine screen 
should be easily visible at all times, from whichever position 
the patient dialyzes, and the controls should be easily acces-
sible. Some additional precautions include the following:
1. Alarms and communication.  The patient (or caregiver) must 
be able to hear the dialysis machine and its alarms and be 
trained on how to respond to them. Patients must have a 
telephone within hand-reaching distance of the dialysis 
machine to contact emergency services, if needed. Some 
programs prefer a wired (noncordless) landline telephone 
over a cellular phone, to ensure function during power fail-
ure or inadequate network reception. The telephone ringer 
must be audible by the patient in case of contact attempts 
by a remote monitoring center.
2. Prevention of line disconnection
a. Proper cannulation technique.  Patient or caregiver compe -
tence with the cannulation procedure and with secur -
ing the cannula are mandatory prerequisites for home 
treatment.
b. Securing lines.  Meticulous taping of the blood tubing 
connection to the dialysis catheter is very important 
to prevent exsanguination from accidental disconnec-
tion. Plastic clamshell locking boxes have been used to 
prevent catheter–tubing separation (Pierratos, 1999). 
A small blood line connector clip (HemaSafe, Fresenius 
NA, Lexington, MA) is widely available.
3. Prevention of morbidity when lines disconnect
a. Closed connector devices.  The use of a closed connector 
device is recommended if the patient performs dialysis 
while asleep (conditional/weak recommendation, very 
low quality evidence) (Nesrallah, 2013) to prevent air 
embolization and bleeding resulting from accidental 
disconnection of the tubing from the dialysis catheter. 
These are catheter caps with a slit diaphragm, allowing 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   308 09/10/14   1:17 am
309Chapter 16 / Home and Intensive Hemodialysis
blood flow while in place. They are replaced periodically 
from every week to every month depending on local 
practices and manufacturer recommendations. The In-
terLink System (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) 
can be used only for  long HD, as it results in increased 
arterial and venous pressures at the higher pump speeds 
used in other regimens. The TEGO (ICU Medical, CA) 
connector provides less resistance to flow and can be 
used with higher blood flow rates. The Swan-Lock con-
nector (Codan, Lensahn, Germany) has also been used.
b. Moisture detectors.  An enuresis alarm, such as the 
Drisleeper (Alpha Consultants Ltd., Nelson, New 
 Zealand), can be attached to the cannula entry points to 
detect bleeding. Disposable leak detectors are also avail-
able (RedSense Medical AB, Halmstad, Sweden). A wire-
less wetness detector, which stops the machine blood 
pump, was recently released (Fresenius Medical Care, 
Lexington, MA). Finally, moisture sensors can be placed 
on the floor around the machine and near the water sup-
ply to detect blood, dialysate, and water leaks (Pierratos, 
2000).
c. T wo-pump, single-needle system.  In case of accidental dis-
connection of the venous line, substantial blood loss and 
even exsanguination can occur. As discussed in Chapter 4,  
one cannot rely on a drop in the venous line pressure af-
ter line disconnection to stop the blood pump, and the 
technology described above must be relied upon. Single-
needle dialysis reduces the risk of bleeding due to line 
disconnection, as bleeding will then be restricted to flow 
from the fistula or catheter, rather than via the blood 
pump. For this reason, single-needle dialysis is likely to 
be a safer option for frequent NHD performed at home. 
Given the length and frequency of sessions with long HD, 
the slightly reduced clearance associated with single-
needle HD is not a major concern.
4. Monitoring. Monitoring is typically only considered for NHD. 
A modem or high-speed Internet connection of the HD 
machine to specialized equipment can allow for software-
based real-time monitoring to detect technical problems 
and alarms as they arise (e.g., air and blood leaks). Moni-
toring is also a useful means by which to track treatment 
adherence. Rarely are patient data such as BP monitored 
during night-time dialysis; thus, while monitoring provides 
patient reassurance and security, it is unclear whether 
monitoring actually prevents catastrophic events. Some ju-
risdictions require live remote monitoring by law (e.g., New 
York), but most programs use it for home NHD for the first 
3 months (Heidenheim, 2003); some programs do not use 
it at all (Humber River Hospital, Toronto). iCare (Fresenius 
Medical Care, Lexington, MA) is one such commercially 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   309 09/10/14   1:17 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
310
available real-time monitoring system. Automated tele -
phone response systems have also been used with variable 
success.
 III. INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS FOR HOME HD
A. Support staff. Specially trained nurses, biomedical technicians, 
and physicians are required. Nurses are required for assess-
ment and training, telephone follow-up and troubleshooting, 
ordering of patient supplies, and home visits, while techni -
cians provide machine maintenance and monitor water 
 quality. Biomedical engineering personnel should be involved 
in the development of local policies governing practices, 
 standards, and protocols for the installation and maintenance 
of equipment. The dialysis program's payment carrier should 
be informed of any changes to services provided.
B. Space. Adequate clinic space with appropriate plumbing is 
needed to allow patient training, patient assessments, and 
follow-up clinic visits with the physician and allied health 
personnel.
C. W ater supply.  Water quality should be assessed regardless of 
the source. Endotoxins, mineral content, and chloramines 
should be quantified. Rural water supplies must also be tested 
for coliform bacteria. International standards exist for water 
purity (see Chapter 5) and should be followed. Water purifica-
tion system and HD equipment manufacturers typically spec-
ify water pressure requirements.
1. W ater purification.  Both reverse osmosis and deionization 
systems have been used successfully in home dialysis. 
 Purification systems have become increasingly compact 
and quiet enough to install in a patient's bedroom, though 
more remote installation is also possible where desired. 
Patients should be instructed in maintenance procedures 
for their water systems, including filter changes and disin-
fection of lines and units. Ultrapure dialysate (generated 
by using an ultrafilter) has also been used by most pro-
grams and may be preferable for NHD, where the quan-
tity of dialysate exposure (~108–144 L per session) can 
compound the effects of inferior water quality. Disinfec-
tion and water sampling frequency (usually monthly) will 
depend on the system utilized and must follow national 
water standards.
D. Dialysis machines. No existing data favor the use of any one type 
of HD machine over another; thus, any machine that can be 
used for in-center therapy can be used for home daily dialysis. 
Some machines are large, cumbersome, and difficult to use, 
though there appears to be a growing interest in producing 
machines that are better suited to home dialysis. Noise is a 
factor for machines used for NHD. Other considerations in 
home HD machine design include simplicity/ease of use, vis-
ibility of the screen and accessibility of controls, short setup, 
and simple maintenance and disinfection procedures.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   310 09/10/14   1:17 am
311Chapter 16 / Home and Intensive Hemodialysis
The NxStage System One (NxStage Medical Inc., Law-
rence, MA) is described separately, as it differs from other 
devices in the use of lower dialysate flow rate with prefilled 
dialysate bags, as well as a cartridge-based dialyzer and tubing 
setup (Clark and Turk, 2004). Their lactate-based dialysate can 
be delivered in ready-made 5-L bags or can be produced by the 
PureFlow™ system from powdered dialysate mix, and made up 
in volumes of between 15 and 60 L for longer treatments. The 
amount of water needed is similar to the dialysate volume, as 
is the case when deionizers are used. The NxStage device is 
transportable and can be used when traveling. It requires fewer 
or no renovations at the home of the patient. One limitation of 
the NxStage device at the present time is a maximal dialysate 
flow rate of 200 mL/min. Although there is no incorporated 
heparin pump, low-molecular-weight heparin or an external 
heparin pump can be utilized. The clinical significance of low 
dialysate flow is discussed in the adequacy and dose section 
below.
1. Equipment maintenance programs. These are central to patient 
safety. Most manufacturers provide suggested maintenance 
schedules, and these should serve as a bare minimum 
requirement to prevent complications and equipment 
failure. In addition to a rigorous water purification mainte-
nance schedule, microbiological and endotoxin screening 
of product water and dialysis solution are critically impor -
tant, particularly with high-flux membranes. Some recom-
mend doing such screening monthly.
E. Remote overnight monitoring. Commercially available devices and 
software tools are listed above. Programs may choose to have 
their own central monitoring station with trained overnight 
personnel; alternatively, one centralized station for multiple 
programs may be considered to reduce costs.
 I V. PRESCRIPTION OF INTENSIVE HD
A. Physiological rationale
1. Solute removal advantage of increased weekly dialysis time.  For 
solutes like poorly dialyzed middle molecules, the plasma 
concentration does not change much during dialysis, and 
for this reason, the main factor governing removal is total 
weekly dialysis time. Distributing the same weekly time 
over more frequent sessions is of limited benefit. This is 
true for phosphate as well. The intradialytic concentra -
tion of phosphate falls precipitously during the first hour 
of dialysis, but then plateaus; as a result, weekly phosphate 
removal depends primarily on total weekly dialysis time.
2. Solute removal advantage of increased frequency . For solutes 
such as urea, and for the theoretically “sequestered” solutes 
modeled using standard Kt/V ( for a description of standard 
Kt/V [stdKt/V ] see Chapter 3), the intradialytic plasma con-
centration continues to fall as a dialysis session  progresses 
for this reason, prolongation of a dialysis session beyond 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   311 09/10/14   1:17 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
312
4 hours is of limited benefit, and it is advantageous to dis-
tribute the same weekly time over more frequent sessions. 
The most efficient solute removal occurs during the early 
part of the dialysis session, when the plasma solute con-
centration is the highest. The standard Kt/V measure best 
reflects the effect of more frequent dialysis schedules on 
highly sequestered, but easily dialyzable solutes.
There also is an advantage for phosphorus removal in 
terms of increasing dialysis frequency, as removal of phos-
phorus is substantially higher during the initial hour of 
dialysis than during the “plateau phase. ” When the weekly 
dialysis time is long (>20 hours), the total weekly time 
is the main determinant of phosphorus removal. When 
weekly dialysis time is <12 hours, breaking this up into six, 
as opposed to three, sessions per week often will decrease 
predialysis serum phosphorus level, albeit slightly.
3. Ultrafiltration advantage of increasing weekly dialysis time.  The 
amount of fluid that needs to be removed per week will be 
a function of weekly fluid ingestion minus weekly residual 
urine volume. If one doubles the weekly dialysis time, and 
if fluid ingestion remains constant, the ultrafiltration rate 
will be halved, greatly reducing hemodynamic stress asso-
ciated with fluid removal.
4. Ultrafiltration advantage of increasing dialysis frequency . Even if 
weekly dialysis time is not increased, there may be some ad-
vantage to increasing frequency, because at the beginning of 
a dialysis session, more of the excess fluid is associated with 
the central blood volume compartment. In the FHN “Daily” 
Trial (Chertow, 2010), where weekly dialysis time was in-
creased marginally, and in which weekly fluid ingestion also 
increased slightly, there was a benefit in terms of reduction 
of intradialytic hypotensive episodes per treatment, but as a 
greater number of treatments per week were given, the num-
ber of hypotensive episodes per week was increased.
5. Benefit of avoiding a long interdialytic interval.  Observational 
studies show that in patients being dialyzed with three-
times-per-week schedules, mortality is highest on Mon-
days in patients following a Mon-Wed-Fri schedule, and on 
Tuesdays in patients following a Tues-Thurs-Sat schedule. 
It is not clear whether the increased mortality is due to the 
requirement for increased fluid removal or to the buildup of 
various uremic toxins, including potassium, over the 3-day 
weekend interdialytic interval. This observation argues 
against use of a three-times-per-week schedule at home in 
situations where an every-other-day schedule is feasible.
6. Potential adverse effect of frequent , long nocturnal  hemodialysis 
schedules on residual kidney function.  In the FHN Nocturnal 
Trial, it was noted that the loss of residual kidney func-
tion was accelerated in those patients who were dialyz-
ing more often than 4.5 times per week using long session 
lengths (weekly dialysis time longer than 28 hours per 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   312 09/10/14   1:17 am
313Chapter 16 / Home and Intensive Hemodialysis
week) (Daugirdas, 2013). This was not found in patients 
with shorter weekly dialysis times. This observation needs 
to be confirmed, but in patients with substantial residual 
kidney function, a very intensive ( frequent and long) dialy-
sis schedule may not be optimal unless needed to control 
refractory volume overload or hyperphosphatemia.
B. Adequacy and urea clearance
1. Standard Kt/V. The standard Kt/V (stdKt/V) concept that 
has been described in Chapters 3 and 11 is generally used 
to quantify urea clearance in DHD and NHD. StdKt/V is a 
frequency-independent measure of dialysis dose. It is a 
weekly expression (normalized to V) of a modified equiva-
lent urea clearance, and is defined as the urea generation 
rate divided by the mean peak predialysis serum urea ni-
trogen (SUN) level. The effect of dialysis frequency on the 
stdKt/V can more easily be seen graphically, and is shown in 
Figure 16.1. It can be seen that when three-times-per-week 
dialysis sessions are given, each lasting about 3.5 hours and 
delivering a single-pool (sp) Kt/V of 1.2, the resulting std-
Kt/V will be 2.15 (when calculated using modeling or the 
so-called “FHN equation”). Increasing the spKt/V using a 
three-times-per-week schedule has only a modest effect on 
increasing stdKt/V. One can see that, to achieve the same 
FIGURE 16.1 The relationship between weekly stdKt/V and per-dialysis single-pool 
Kt/V (spKt/V). The data assume a patient V of 40 L, dialyzer clearance of 200 mL/min, 
and  dialysis time ranging from 30 to 270 min. The horizontal line at 2.15 represents the 
stdKt/V (calculated using the FHN method or urea kinetic modeling) associated with the 
KDOQI minimum session spKt/V of 1.2 with a 3 per week dialysis session. The numbers 
on the right show number of treatments per week.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0.40 .5 0.60 .7 0.80 .911 .1 1.21 .3 1.41 .5
Standard Kt/V (per week)
Single-pool Kt/V per session
7
6
5
4
3
2
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   313 09/10/14   1:17 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
314
stdKt/V of 2.15 using six-times-per-week SDHD (short daily 
hemodialysis), an spKt/V of about 0.5 needs to be delivered 
during each session. For simplified methods of calculating 
stdKt/V  see Appendix C.
2. Prescription recommendations for Urea Clearance
a. DHD. Patients following a six-times-per-week DHD 
schedule have been treated with session lengths rang-
ing from 1.5–3 hours (Table 16.1) six times weekly, cor -
responding to weekly dialysis times of 9–18 hours. Blood 
and dialysate flow rates are usually similar to those in 
conventional dialysis, as well as dialyzers. In the FHN 
Daily Trial, patients receiving DHD received an average 
standard Kt/V of 3.6 per week, corresponding to an aver-
age equilibrated Kt/V of 1.06 per session given on aver -
age 5 times per week. It is reasonable to start with 2-hour 
treatments, 12 hours per week. This schedule may then 
be adjusted depending on the measured delivered dose 
and patient satisfaction, remembering that every dialy -
sis session need not be of the same length. In selected 
patients, further increases in dialysis session length (be-
yond 2 hours) should be considered, as this may be of help 
in removing more phosphate and also salt and water, as 
described below. DHD sessions in the 1.5-hour range may 
be sufficient for those with substantial residual renal 
function, but weekly stdKt/V should be monitored.
b. NHD. With HD for 6–10 hours, three or more times per 
week, stdKt/V values will typically be well above 2.0, as-
suming that an spKt/V of at least 1.2 is delivered per ses-
sion. The stdKt/V is affected to a modest degree by session 
length, and going from a 3.5- to a 6- to 10-hour session 
per se results in a modest increase in stdKt/V for three-
times-per-week dialysis, even when spKt/V is unchanged. 
Because of the marked increase in clearance with NHD, 
submaximal blood flows with single-needle dialysis can 
be used to optimize safety, and lower dialysate flows 
may be used to save water costs. We recommend a Qb of 
SDHD Frequent NHD
Frequency (sessions per week) 6–7 5–7
Duration (hours) 1.5–3.0 6–10
Dialyzer (high-flux preferred) Any Any (smaller)
QB (mL/min) 400–500 200–300
QD (mL/min) 500–800 100–300
Access Any Any
Remote monitoring None Optional
Dialyzer reuse Optional Optional
NHD, nocturnal hemodialysis.
Typical SDHD and Frequent NHD Prescriptions
16.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   314 09/10/14   1:17 am
315Chapter 16 / Home and Intensive Hemodialysis
200–250 mL/min with single needle, with Qd of 300 mL/
min. In the FHN Nocturnal Trial, the typical prescription 
was at least 6 hours, given on  average 5 nights per week, 
achieving a stdKt/V of 5.0.
C. Dialysate composition. There is little evidence on optimal dialy -
sate composition for frequent and long-duration HD. Similar 
dialysate composition may be used when switching from con-
ventional dialysis to frequent or long-duration HD, with the 
exception that bicarbonate may need to be reduced and phos-
phate may need to be added. Dialysate composition should be 
individualized to achieve pre- and postdialysis levels in the local 
laboratory “normal” range (see below). A typical dialysate con-
tains Na+ 135–140 mM, K+ 2.0–3.5 mM, HCO3
− 28–34 mM, Ca++ 
1.25–1.75 mM (2.5–3.5 mEq/L), and Mg++ 0.5 mM (1 mEq/L). 
1. Bicarbonate: HCO 3
− concentration should be adjusted to 
achieve a predialysis bicarbonate of 22–24 mmol/L. We 
usually start with a bicarbonate of 28–33 mmol/L for pa-
tients receiving frequent HD (either DHD or NHD). One 
must remember that the bicarbonate concentration read -
out on most dialysis machines does not take into account 
the alkalinizing effect of sodium acetate or sodium citrate 
present in bicarbonate dialysate solutions. Especially with 
frequent, long NHD, the dialysis solution bicarbonate 
should be set toward the lower end to limit the occurrence 
of postdialysis alkalemia.
2. Phosphorus. To control serum phosphorus in patients in -
gesting a usual amount of protein, about 24–28 hours per 
week of dialysis is required in the absence of phosphorus 
binder ingestion. Increasing dialysis frequency in SDHD 
without increasing weekly dialysis time will have only a 
trivial effect on serum phosphorus, especially because 
many patients will tend to increase their protein and phos-
phorus intake. Patients treated with three nocturnal ses-
sions per week, or every other night nocturnal dialysis will 
have a more marked reduction in serum phosphorus, and 
some may no longer need phosphorus binders, although a 
substantial number will continue to require them. Those 
patients treated with long sessions 5–6 times per week 
typically will go into negative phosphorus balance unless 
some phosphate is added to the dialysate. Whereas hy-
pophosphatemia at the end of dialysis is common, predi -
alysis hypophosphatemia is undesirable and is associated 
with an elevated risk of mortality. Hypophosphatemia can 
be exacerbated during periods of reduced food intake, for 
example, during intercurrent illness. For this reason, most 
patients dialyzed more than 30 hours per week will need 
some phosphate added to the dialysate.
Sodium phosphate preparations have been used to 
enrich dialysate with phosphorus to prevent or treat  
hypophosphatemia in patients treated with chronic high-
intensity dialysis. The dialysate phosphorus concentration 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   315 09/10/14   1:17 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
316
is usually 0.32–0.65 mM (1–2 mg/dL) although higher con-
centrations may be necessary in some patients. The phos-
phate can be added to either the acid or the bicarbonate 
liquid concentrate. Enema preparations containing so -
dium phosphate (C. B. Fleet Company, Lynchburg, VA) con-
sisting of a mixture of NaH2PO4 • H2O and Na2HPO4 • 7H2O 
have been widely used for this purpose. However, nonrectal 
use of phosphate enemas has not been approved by the U.S. 
Federal Drug Administration (FDA), and the purity of such 
phosphate preparations is not known. The enema solu-
tions do contain a small amount of benzalkonium chloride 
(a biocide and preservative) and disodium EDTA, which are 
then massively diluted further in the final dialysis solution. 
An alternative method of phosphate supplementation is 
to add an appropriate amount of phosphorus using USP-
grade (United States Pharmacopeia) sodium phosphate 
salts (Sam, 2013). Phosphate preparations for intravenous 
use (Troyanov, 2004; Hussain, 2005) have been added to 
hemodiafiltration solutions to increase their phosphorus 
concentration, but their routine use in long nocturnal di-
alysis would be quite expensive owing  to the large volume 
of dialysis solution needed.
3 Calcium. Patients receiving frequent, long NHD can de-
plete their total-body calcium unless a slightly higher-
than-usual dialysis solution calcium concentration is used  
(Al Hejaili, 2003). Use of a dialysate calcium concentration 
of 2.5 mEq/L (1.25 mM) in such patients has been shown to 
result in hyperparathyroidism that is refractory to vitamin 
D analog therapy, especially if the patient is no longer tak -
ing calcium-based phosphorus binders. The ideal dialysate 
calcium concentration for an individual patient will vary 
with dietary calcium intake, ingestion of supplemental 
calcium (including calcium-based phosphorus binders), 
vitamin D analog use, ultrafiltration volume, and the level 
of parathyroid gland activity. Measurement of pre- and 
postdialysis calcium levels can help identify an ideal bath 
calcium concentration for a given patient. The CSN clinical 
practice guideline for intensive HD (Nesrallah, 2013) cur -
rently recommends using a dialysate calcium of 1.5 mM 
(3.0 mEq/L) or higher for long, frequent HD. If concentrates 
with the desired calcium concentration are not available, 
one can add the required amount of powdered calcium 
chloride (the Humber program uses CaCl 2•2H2O USP) to 
the acid concentrate. The need for a higher dialysate cal-
cium is a problem only for long, frequent NHD; SDHD is not 
associated with marked changes in calcium levels, and for 
these treatments, standard dialysate calcium concentra -
tions of 1.25 mM (2.5 mEq/L) are typically used.
D. Anticoagulation. Long HD with slow blood pump speeds gener -
ally cannot be performed without anticoagulation. Standard 
heparin protocols may be used for all frequent HD schedules. 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   316 09/10/14   1:17 am
317Chapter 16 / Home and Intensive Hemodialysis
Some programs have used low-molecular-weight heparin as 
a bolus with or without a mid-dialysis top-up dose for longer 
session length treatments, but published evidence of safety 
and efficacy is lacking.
E. Ultrafiltration, adjustment of target weight, and antihypertensive medi -
cations. Improvement in BP control may be noted as early 
as 1 week after changing to intensified HD, is most marked 
within the first few months, and may continue for many 
months thereafter. Not uncommonly, the BP may be so mark-
edly improved by long or frequent HD that a patient will no 
longer need antihypertensive drugs. Cardioprotective agents 
such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or beta-  
blockers may still be prescribed, if desired, but at lower doses 
as tolerated.
Target weight with intensive HD is set as per usual 
practice, aiming for clinical euvolemia and normal pre- and 
postdialysis BP , while avoiding intradialytic hypotension and 
symptoms. Larger interdialytic weight gains can be expected 
as patients liberalize dietary sodium and fluid intake with 
longer and more frequent sessions. Patients can be trained to 
self-adjust ultrafiltration goals on the basis of weight and BP 
parameters, making small incremental changes (e.g., 0.3–0.5 
kg per session) to their target weights until desired values are 
achieved.
F. Follow-up
1. Clinic visits. Most patients should be seen within 2–4 weeks 
of starting home therapy, then monthly for 3 months, then 
every 2–3 months thereafter. This assumes that 24-hour 
on-call nursing support is available. The use of dialysis “run 
sheets” allows for documentation of weights, BP , and intra-
dialytic complications. Patients should bring these to each 
clinic visit.
2. Blood tests.  Patients dialyzing at home can be provided 
with blood centrifuges and can be instructed in the proper  
handling and preparation of blood samples.
 V. COMP ARATIVE EFFECTIVENESS AND SAFETY OF HOME AND INTENSIVE HD 
VERSUS OTHER MODALITIES
A. Conventional Home HD. To date, there have been no trials com-
paring home with center HD. Observational studies have 
 suggested better survival with home HD, but unmeasured 
patient  characteristics, including health literacy, motiva -
tion, psychological well-being, social support structures, 
functional ability, and socioeconomic factors, may account 
for the greater survival rates observed in home HD popula-
tions. Patient unwillingness to be randomly allocated to the 
home or in-center setting is a major barrier to conducting 
randomized  trials. Although not  directly measured, the free-
dom associated with self-scheduling,  self-management, and 
more liberal diet likely improve patient quality of life with 
home HD.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   317 09/10/14   1:17 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
318
B. Frequent HD
1. Short and standard frequent HD.  No clinical trials have com -
pared home DHD with any other modality. An observational 
study from Australia suggested no mortality difference 
between patients receiving intensive home HD compared 
with those receiving conventional home HD (Marshall, 
2011). In the FHN Daily Trial, patients who received SDHD 
in-center had statistically and clinically significantly better 
SF-36 (physical composite summary) scores and regression 
of ventricular hypertrophy compared with patients who re-
ceived conventional center HD (Chertow, 2010). It should 
be noted that the delivered treatments in these patients 
averaged 2.5 hours in duration, and were given on average 
5.2 times per week. There is preliminary evidence that sur -
vival was better in the patients randomized to the frequent-
treatment arm (Chertow, 2013). A recent multinational 
survival study showed a higher risk of death with SDHD; 
however, this study was prone to residual confounding, as 
patients treated with SDHD likely had higher (unmeasured) 
baseline risk than could be adjusted for in statistical mod-
els (Suri, 2013). Although there are several observational 
studies evaluating physiological outcomes with DHD, the 
FHN Daily Trial provides the least biased estimates of these 
effects. In this study, patients receiving SDHD had better 
phosphate and BP control, but no differences in nutritional 
variables, anemia management, mental health, or cognitive 
function were detected.
An important safety signal in the FHN trials was an 
increased need for interventions to maintain AV access 
patency. Whether this was due to differential surveillance 
(more frequent visits) or an effect of frequent cannulation 
was not clear. There was a trend to reduced complications 
with buttonhole cannulation, with DHD (Suri, 2013 [JASN]).
2. Long, frequent HD. To date, two randomized trials have com-
pared frequent NHD with conventional HD. A Canadian 
study demonstrated regression of left ventricular hypertro-
phy (LVH) among patients randomized to NHD (Culleton, 
2007), while the larger FHN nocturnal study did not (Rocco, 
2011). The effect of NHD on LV mass may have been attenu-
ated by preserved residual renal function in the FHN study 
population. Both studies found improved BP and phos-
phate control with NHD. Studies evaluating the effects of 
NHD on patient survival have been observational. As with 
studies of conventional home HD, NHD is associated with 
greater survival compared with conventional HD, but resid-
ual confounding should be considered when interpreting 
these results.
In the FHN Nocturnal Trial, procedures to maintain 
the vascular access were significantly increased with home 
long, frequent HD compared with  conventional home HD, 
and there was a trend to increased perceived burden on 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   318 09/10/14   1:17 am
319Chapter 16 / Home and Intensive Hemodialysis
caregivers as well. Finally, patients who received frequent 
NHD had increased risk of complete loss of residual renal 
function at 12 months compared to patients assigned to a  
3-days-per-week schedule. These potential adverse effects 
should be discussed with patients before starting frequent 
NHD. The mortality effects are unclear; patients random-
ized to the six-nights-per-week group had an increased risk 
of long-term mortality compared with those randomized to 
conventional HD (Rocco, 2013), but the significant cross-
over rates and minute sample size preclude definitive inter-
pretation of these results.
C. Long-session dialysis given three times per week or every other day. The 
Tassin experience showed marked improvements in survival, 
BP , and phosphate control among recipients of thrice-weekly 
in- center HD lasting 8 hours per session (Charra, 2004). More 
recently, large dialysis organizations in the United States have 
provided three-per-week in-center NHD and have reported bet-
ter survival and physiological variables compared with conven-
tional center HD; the published experience with every-other-day 
home HD in Australia and New Zealand has shown similar re-
sults. However, all of this evidence is observational, with the po-
tential problem of bias due to patient selection and confounding.
 VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS. Home dialysis in general, as 
well as intensified HD regimens are increasing in popularity, par-
ticularly in high-income countries. Efforts to understand the ben-
efits and risks of such alternative dialysis prescriptions continue 
to rely on observational studies, as randomized trials are quite 
difficult to carry out in this area. Until higher-quality evidence is 
available to inform decision making, providers would serve their 
patients well by focusing modality discussions on patients' values 
and preferences, and the specific physiological considerations 
described in this chapter.
References and Selected Readings
Al-Hejaili F, et al. Nocturnal but not short hours quotidian hemodialysis requires an 
elevated dialysate calcium concentration. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003;14:2322–2328.
Ayus JC, et al. Effects of short daily versus conventional hemodialysis on left ventricular 
hypertrophy and inflammatory markers: a prospective, controlled study. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2005;16:2778–2788.
Blagg CR. A brief history of home hemodialysis. Adv Ren Replace Ther. 1996;3:99–105.
Chan CT, et al. Short-term blood pressure, noradrenergic, and vascular effects of noc-
turnal home hemodialysis. Hypertension. 2003;42:925–931.
Charra B, et al. Long thrice weekly hemodialysis: the Tassin experience. Int J Artif Or -
gans. 2004;27:265–283.
Chertow GM, et al. ( for the FHN Trial group). In-center hemodialysis six times per 
week versus three times per week. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2287–2300.
Chertow GM, et al.; the FHN Group. Effects of randomization to frequent in-center 
hemodialysis on long-term mortality: frequent hemodialysis daily trial [abstract 
FR-PO342]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:442A.
Clark WR, Turk JE. The NxStage system one. Semin Dial. 2004;17:167–170.
Culleton BF, et al. Effect of frequent nocturnal hemodialysis vs conventional hemo-
dialysis on left ventricular mass and quality of life: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA. 2007;298:1291–1299.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   319 09/10/14   1:17 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
320
Daugirdas JT, et al.; the FHN Trial Group. Effect of frequent hemodialysis on residual 
kidney function. Kidney Int. 2013;83:949–958.
Depner TA. Daily hemodialysis efficiency: an analysis of solute kinetics. Adv Ren 
 Replace Ther. 2001;8:227–235.
Diaz-Buxo JA, Schlaeper C, VanValkenburgh D. Evolution of home hemodialysis moni-
toring systems. Hemodial Int. 2003;7:353–355.
Gotch FA. The current place of urea kinetic modelling with respect to different dialysis 
modalities. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1998;13(suppl 6):10–14.
Heidenheim AP , et al. Patient monitoring in the London daily/nocturnal hemodialysis 
study. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42(1 suppl):61–65.
Hussain SA, et al. Phosphate enriched hemodialysis during pregnancy: two case series. 
Hemodial Int. 2005;9:147–152.
Ing TS, et al. Phosphorus-enriched hemodialysates: formulations and clinical use. 
 Hemodial Int. 2003;7:148–155.
Muir CA, et al. Buttonhole cannulation and clinical outcomes in a home hemodialysis 
cohort and systematic review. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;9:110–119.
Leitch R, et al. Nursing issues related to patient selection, vascular access, and educa-
tion in quotidian hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42(1 suppl):56–60.
Marshall MR, et al. Home hemodialysis and mortality risk in Australian and New 
 Zealand populations. Am J Kidney Dis. 2011;58(5):782–793.
McFarlane PA. Reducing hemodialysis costs: conventional and quotidian home hemo-
dialysis in Canada. Semin Dial. 2004;17:118–124.
Mucsi I, et al. Control of serum phosphate without any phosphate binders in patients 
treated with nocturnal hemodialysis. Kidney Int. 1998;53:1399–1404.
Muir CA, et al. Buttonhole cannulation and clinical outcomes in a home hemodialysis 
cohort and systematic review. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;9:110–119.
Mustafa RA, et al. Vascular access for intensive maintenance hemodialysis: a system-
atic review for a Canadian Society of Nephrology clinical practice guideline. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 2013;62:112–131.
Nesrallah GE, et al. Staphylococcus aureus  bacteremia and buttonhole cannulation: 
long-term safety and efficacy of mupirocin prophylaxis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol . 
2010;5:1047–1053.
Nesrallah GE, et al. Canadian Society of Nephrology guidelines for the management 
of patients with end stage renal disease treated with intensive hemodialysis. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 2013;62:187–198.
Pierratos A. Nocturnal home haemodialysis: an update on a 5-year experience. Nephrol 
Dial Tranplant. 1999;14:2835–2840.
Pierratos A. Delayed dialyzer reprocessing for home hemodialysis. Home Hemodial Int. 
2000;4:51–54.
Rocco MV et al., ( for the FHN Trial Group). The effects of frequent nocturnal home 
hemodialysis: the frequent hemodialysis network nocturnal trial. Kidney Int. 
2011;80:1080–1091.
Rocco MV , et al., the FHN Group. Effects of randomization to frequent nocturnal  
hemodialysis on long-term mortality: Frequent Hemodialysis Nocturnal Trial  
[abstract FR-PO345]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:443A.
Sam R, et al. Using disodium monohydrogen phosphate to prepare a phosphate-  
enriched hemodialysate. Hemodial Int. 2013;17:667–668.
Suri RS, et al. Daily hemodialysis: a systematic review. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006;1:  
33–42.
Suri RS, et al. Risk of vascular access complications with frequent hemodialysis. J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:498–505.
Suri RS, et al. A multinational cohort study of in-center daily hemodialysis and patient 
survival. Kidney Int. 2013;83:300–307.
Troyanov S, et al. Phosphate addition to hemodiafiltration solutions during continu-
ous renal replacement therapy. Intensive Care Med. 2004;30:1662–1665.
Walsh M, et al. A systematic review of the effect of nocturnal hemodialysis on blood 
pressure, left ventricular hypertrophy, anemia, mineral metabolism, and health-
related quality-of-life. Kidney Int. 2005;67:1501–1508.
Web References
Home dialysis central: http://www.homedialysis.org.
ISHD home dialysis handbook: http://www.ishdn.net.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch016.indd   320 09/10/14   1:17 am