333
Therapeutic Apheresis
Dobri D. Kiprov, Amber Sanchez, 
and Charles Pusey
Therapeutic apheresis (TA) refers to a group of extracorporeal pro -
cedures in which blood separation technology is used to remove 
abnormal blood cells and/or plasma constituents. The terms plas-
mapheresis, leukapheresis, erythrocytapheresis, and thrombocy -
tapheresis describe the specific blood element that is removed. In 
plasmapheresis, or therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE), large quanti-
ties of plasma are removed from a patient and replaced with fresh 
frozen plasma (FFP), or albumin solutions in normal saline.
 I. RA TIONALE FOR PLASMAPHERESIS (TPE).  T here are several mecha -
nisms by which plasmapheresis exerts its beneficial effects 
( Table 18.1). Its major mode of action is rapid depletion of spe-
cific disease-associated factors. Another effect is its ability to 
remove other high-molecular-weight proteins that may partici-
pate in the inflammatory process (intact complement C3, C4, 
activated complement products, fibrinogen, and cytokines). 
Several other theoretical effects of TPE on immune function have 
been proposed, including immunomodulatory actions such as 
alterations in idiotypic/anti-idiotypic antibody balance, a shift in 
the antibody-to-antigen ratio to more soluble forms of immune 
complexes ( facilitating their clearance), and stimulation of lym-
phocyte clones to enhance cytotoxic therapy. TPE also allows the 
infusion of normal plasma, which may replace a deficient plasma 
component, perhaps the principal mechanism of action of TPE in 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).
A. Principles of treatment
1. Use of concomitant immunosuppression.  B ecause of the immu-
nologic nature of most diseases treated by plasmapheresis, 
therapy should almost always include concomitant immu -
nosuppression. Adjunct medication protocols usually 
include high doses of corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs, and 
biologic agents. These medications are expected to reduce 
the rate of resynthesis of pathologic antibodies and to fur -
ther modulate cell-mediated immunity, which may con -
tribute to many of these disorders.
2. Early treatment.  D iseases that respond to plasmapheresis 
are best treated early to halt the inflammatory response 
18
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   333 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
334
Substance
Molecular 
Weight % Intravascular
Half-life 
(days)
Normal Serum 
Concentration  
(mg/dL)
Albumin
IgG
IgA
IgM
LDL-cholesterol 
(β-lipoprotein)
69,000
180,000
150,000
900,000
1,300,000
40
45
50
80
100
19
21
  6
  5
3–5
3,500–4,500
640–1430
30–300
60–350
140–200
Distribution Volumes of Immunoglobulins
18.2
TABLE
that often contributes to disease progression. For example, 
plasmapheresis of anti–glomerular basement membrane 
(GBM) disease is most effective if therapy is initiated when 
serum creatinine is <5 mg/dL (440 mcmol/L).
 II. PHARMACOKINETICS OF IMMUNOGLOBULIN (Ig) REMOVAL
A. Plasma half-life.  I mmunoglobulins have relatively long half-
lives, approaching 21 days for IgG and 5 days for IgM. Because 
of the relatively long plasma half-lives of the immunoglobu-
lins, the use of immunosuppressive agents that decrease their 
production rate cannot be expected to lower the plasma levels 
of a pathogenic autoantibody for at least several weeks, even 
if production is completely blocked. This is the basic rationale 
for their removal by extracorporeal means.
B. Extravascular distribution and equilibration rate.  Immunoglobulins 
have a substantial extravascular distribution (Table 18.2). 
The extent of intravascular versus extravascular distribution 
will determine how effectively they can be removed in the 
Removal of Abnormal Circulating Factor
Antibody (anti-GBM disease, myasthenia gravis, Guillain–Barré syndrome)
Monoclonal protein (Waldenström macroglobulinemia, myeloma protein)
Circulating immune complexes (cryoglobulinemia, SLE)
Alloantibody (Rh alloimmunization in pregnancy)
Toxic factor
Replenishment of Specific Plasma Factor
TTP
Other Effects on the Immune System
Improvement in function of reticuloendothelial system
Removal of inflammatory mediators (cytokines, complement)
Shift in antibody-to-antigen ratio, resulting in more soluble forms of immune 
complexes
Effects on the cellular immune system
GBM, glomerular basement membrane; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TTP , thrombotic throm-
bocytopenic purpura.
Possible Mechanisms of Action of Therapeutic 
Plasma Exchange18.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   334 09/10/14   1:21 am
335Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
course of a single plasmapheresis session. Immunoglobulins 
exhibit an intravascular-to-extravascular equilibration that 
is approximately 1%–2% per hour, whereas extravascular-to-
intravascular equilibration may be somewhat faster because 
it is governed by the rate of lymphatic flow. Still, since the 
 extravascular-to-intravascular equilibration is relatively slow, 
the kinetics of immunoglobulin removal by plasma exchange 
can be calculated by using first-order kinetics governing removal 
rates from a single compartment (the intravascular space).
C. The macromolecule reduction ratio and Ve/Vp. I n Chapter 3, the 
relationship between the urea reduction ratio (URR) and Kt/V 
was described. A similar relationship holds for removal of 
immunoglobulins by TPE.
The kinetics of immunoglobulin removal by TPE follows 
an exponential relationship:
= −
oCC et
V/ Vep
where C0 = the initial plasma concentration of the macro -
molecule in question, Ct = its concentration at time t, Ve = 
the volume of plasma exchanged at time t, and V p = the esti-
mated plasma volume, which, while smaller than the volume 
of distribution of many of these macromolecules, functions as 
the volume from which they are removed, given the slow rate 
of equilibration between the extravascular and intravascular 
compartments.
The macromolecule reduction ratio (MRR), expressed as a 
percentage, is 100 × (1 − Ct/C0), so MRR = 100 × (1−e−Ve/Vp).  
If we plug in numbers for V e from 1,400 mL to 8,400 mL 
(Table 18.3), and if we assume that a patient’s V p is 2,800 mL, 
we will get values of Ve/Vp from 0.5 to 3.0. TPE using these Ve/Vp 
ratios will result in values for the MRR (Table 18.3) ranging from 
39% (when Ve/Vp = 0.5) to 95% (when V e/Vp = 3.0). Note that 
for Ve/Vp = 1.0, the MRR  is 63%. Th e largest decrease ( MRR) 
occurs with removal of the first plasma volume; removal of 
subsequent plasma volumes during the same session becomes 
Portion of Plasma 
Volumea Exchanged 
(Ve/Vp)
Volume Exchanged  
(Ve, mL)
Immunoglobulin  
or Other Substance 
Removed (MRR, %)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1,400
2,800
4,200
5,600
7,000
8,400
39
63
78
86
92
95
Ve, volume of plasma exchanged; Vp, estimated plasma volume; MRR, macromolecule reduction ratio.
aPlasma volume = 2,800 mL in a 70-kg patient, assuming hematocrit = 45%.
Relationship between Plasma Volume Removed 
and Concentration of Substance18.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   335 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
336
progressively less effective in decreasing the concentration of 
the macromolecule in question. The effectiveness of the pro-
cedure after one plasma volume is further reduced because of 
the dilution of the substance to be removed by the exchange 
fluid. For this reason, usually 1.0–1.5 plasma volume equiva -
lents (Ve/Vp) are exchanged during a plasmapheresis session.
D. Reaccumulation. Su bsequent to the removal of the macromol-
ecule in question, there is a reaccumulation of its concentra -
tion in the vascular space from two sources: redistribution and 
further synthesis. Redistribution from the extravascular space 
occurs via lymphatic drainage into the vascular space, as well 
as from diffusion of the macromolecule across capillaries from 
the interstitial to the intravascular space. Endogenous synthe-
sis has been documented in Goodpasture syndrome, in which 
the anti-GBM antibodies will be predictably lowered by a given 
plasma exchange treatment, but intertreatment increases in 
serum levels are too rapid to be compatible with simple re-
equilibration from extravascular stores.
E. Pharmacokinetic basis for TPE prescriptions.  B ased on these con-
cepts, a rational approach to prescribing TPE is generally to 
recommend one plasma volume exchange daily or every other 
day, depending on the disease process, to allow time for ade-
quate redistribution of macromolecules via lymphatic drain -
age into the vascular space. The rate of accumulation and 
the frequency of TPE should be targeted to the specific mac-
romolecule that is pathogenic, if this is known. For example, 
whereas the half-life of IgG is approximately 21 days, that of 
IgM and IgA is much shorter (5–7 days). Therefore, if the mac-
romolecule in question is IgM, there may be a role for a more 
extended period of TPE because the endogenous synthesis 
rate is expected to be higher for IgM than for IgG. In addition, 
the distribution of IgM is predominantly intravascular, while 
the distribution of IgG is mainly in the extravascular space. 
Therefore, when removing IgM antibodies or paraproteins, 
daily TPE is warranted. On the other hand, patients with pre-
sumed IgG autoantibodies should be treated every other day 
to allow for  IgG redistribution from the extravascular space 
into the intravascular compartment. If the substance to be 
removed is measurable by reliable quantitative means (such 
as with specific autoantibody), then the treatment schedule 
should be designed to achieve a significant reduction of that 
substance based on kinetic considerations. If treatments are 
performed without identification of the offending agent, then 
the physician remains dependent on empirical treatment 
regimens.
F. Estimation of plasma volume.  A n estimate of the plasma volume 
is required to arrive at an appropriate plasmapheresis pre-
scription. For this purpose, there are several nomograms and 
equations using height, weight, and hematocrit (Hct). These 
have been incorporated into newer versions of plasmapher -
esis equipment. A useful rule of thumb is to consider plasma 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   336 09/10/14   1:21 am
337Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
volume to be approximately 35–40 mL/kg of lean body weight, 
with the lower number (35 mL/kg) applicable to patients with 
normal Hct values and 40 mL/kg applicable to patients with 
Hct values that are less than normal. For example, in a 70-kg 
patient with a normal Hct (45%), plasma volume (Vp) would be 
70 × 40 = 2,800 mL.
Predicted blood volume equations have been derived by 
curve-fitting techniques using subjects’ height (cm) and body 
weight (kg) compared with actual blood volumes measured 
by isotope (iodine-131 albumin) dilution techniques: V p = 
(1 − Hct) (b + cW), where W = lean body weight, b = 1,530 for 
males, 864 for females, and c = 41 for males, 47.2 for females. It 
is important to remember that these calculations are based on 
lean body weight. Therefore, for obese patients one must use 
lean body mass to avoid unnecessary and dangerously large 
volume exchanges.
 III. TECHNICAL CONSIDERA TIONS. T PE can be performed using cen -
trifugation blood cell separators or by membrane plasma sepa -
ration (MPS). Centrifugation devices are commonly used for 
blood banking since they are capable of selective cell removal 
(cytapheresis) in addition to plasmapheresis. MPS utilizes highly 
permeable hollow-fiber filters, similar to dialyzers but with large 
pore sizes and appropriately modified dialysis equipment. The 
advantages and disadvantages of each technique are summa-
rized in Table 18.4.
A. Centrifugal apheresis. D uring centrifugation, blood cells are sep-
arated by gravity, based on the different densities of the blood 
Advantages Disadvantages
Membrane plasma 
separation
Faster and smaller 
equipment
Removal of substances 
limited by sieving 
coefficient of membrane
Reduced efficiency in 
hyperviscosity syndromes 
and cryoglobulinemia
No citrate requirements Unable to perform 
cytapheresis
Can be adapted for 
cascade filtration
Requires high blood flows, 
central venous access
Requires heparin 
anticoagulation, limiting 
use in bleeding disorders
Centrifugal apheresis Capable of performing 
cytapheresis
Large and heavy 
equipment
No heparin requirement Requires citrate 
anticoagulation
More efficient removal of 
all plasma components
Loss of platelets
Comparison of Membrane Plasma Separation and 
Centrifugal Apheresis18.4
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   337 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
338
components. There are two centrifugation methods used in 
blood cell separators: intermittent-flow  (or discontinuous-
flow) devices and continuous-flow devices. Red blood cells 
(RBCs) move to the outside of the spinning container , while 
plasma, the lightest component, remains on the inside. 
Platelets and white blood cells (WBCs) localize between the 
red cell and plasma layers. Any of these components can be 
collected, discarded, or reinfused (Fig. 18.1).
In the intermittent-flow  separation devices, multiple 
aliquots of blood are sequentially withdrawn and routed to a 
bowl, where each aliquot is processed and then reinfused. In 
FIGURE 18.1 During centrifugal apheresis, plasma and cells are separated in layers 
depending on specific gravity. Each layer can be removed, depending on the procedure 
and fluid and/or cell replacement infused simultaneously. (Courtesy of Dobri Kiprov, MD. 
Reprinted from Linz W, et al. Principles of Apheresis Technology. 5th ed. American Society 
for Apheresis; 2014. www.apheresis.org.)
Red blood cells
White blood cells
Platelets
Plasma
Platelets
White blood cells
Red blood cells
Plasma
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   338 09/10/14   1:21 am
339Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
the continuous-flow method, blood is withdrawn, centri -
fuged, and separated, and the desired component removed or 
returned to the patient in a continuous mode using a hoop-
shaped annulus that has strategically placed sampling ports 
(Fig. 18.1) for the collection of plasma, RBCs, WBCs, and 
platelets. The intermittent-flow method requires a single-
needle vascular access,  while the continuous-flow system 
requires two venous accesses (one for withdrawal and a sec -
ond one for return) or a dual-lumen dialysis-type venous cath-
eter. Intermittent-flow blood cell separators (Haemonetics 
Corporation, Braintree, MA) are rarely used today for thera-
peutic apheresis. The continuous-flow devices are preferred 
for therapeutic procedures because of their smaller extracor -
poreal blood volume, significantly shorter procedure time, 
and lesser anticoagulant requirement. The most widely used 
centrifugal blood cell separators for therapeutic apheresis are 
made by Terumo BCT (Lakewood, CO) and Fresenius Kabi 
(Bad Homburg, Germany).
B. Membrane plasma separation  (MPS).  M embrane plasma separa-
tors are derived from the technology used in dialysis. H ollow-
fiber filters for MPS look very similar to dialysis filters. It is easy 
to assume that one can simply exchange the dialysis filter with 
an MPS filter and perform a hemofiltration procedure without 
dialysate. However, removing plasma is physiologically differ -
ent from removing ultrafiltrate. When water is removed from 
the intravascular compartment, extravascular fluid can dif-
fuse in to buffer the volume removal. When plasma is removed 
from the intravascular compartment, refilling rate of the 
 vascular compartment is reduced. Therefore, there is a higher 
risk of cardiovascular complications during plasma exchange. 
Equipment specifically designed for membrane plasma sepa-
ration must be used to assure patient safety. Membranes with 
a molecular-weight cutoff of about 3 million daltons are used, 
which is  sufficient to allow passage of immune complexes 
(MW ≈1 million). MPS filters  can be manufactured in either 
a hollow-fiber or a parallel-plate configuration. An example 
of a hollow-fiber plasma separator is the Plasma-Flo made 
by Asahi (Apheresis Technologies, Palm Harbor, FL). The 
membrane allows plasma only to pass, as the pores are small 
enough to hold back the formed elements of the blood. The 
membrane has a sieving coefficient (ratio of concentration 
in filtrate to blood) between 0.8 and 0.9 for albumin, IgG, IgA, 
IgM, C3, C4, fibrinogen, cholesterol, and triglycerides (at a 
blood flow rate of 100 mL/min and a transmembrane pressure 
[TMP] of 40 mm Hg) (Fig. 18.2). A number of manufacturers 
offer either modified CRRT equipment or dedicated instru-
ments for membrane plasmapheresis.
Membrane plasma separation (MPS) must be performed 
at low TMP (< 500 mm Hg) to avoid hemolysis. With hollow-
fiber devices, the blood flow rate should exceed 50 mL/min 
to avoid clotting. The ideal blood flow rate (Q b) is usually 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   339 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
340
100–150 mL/min. When the blood flow rate is 100 mL/min, 
a plasma removal rate of 30–50 mL/min can be expected. 
Thus, the average time required to perform a typical mem-
brane filtration ( Ve = 2,800 mL) is < 2 hours (40 mL/min × 
60  minutes = 2,400 mL/hr).
C. Comparison of membrane and centrifugation devices  ( Table  18.4).  
Centrifugal blood cell separators are the preferred therapeu -
tic apheresis devices in the United States. These are capable 
of performing cytapheresis (leukapheresis, erythrocytapher -
esis, and thrombocytapheresis) in addition to plasmapher -
esis. Centrifugal devices also operate at lower whole-blood 
FIGURE 18.2 During membrane plasma separation, blood cells are not allowed to pass 
through the pores of the filter, while plasma constituents pass through. (Courtesy of Dobri 
Kiprov, MD. Reprinted from Linz W, et al. Principles of Apheresis Technology. 5th ed. 
American Society for Apheresis; 2014. www.apheresis.org.)
Albumin
Cholesterol
Na, Ce, K, CA Urea creatinine
glucose
IgG
IgA
IgM
Fibrinogen
Red
blood cells
White
blood cells
Platelets
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   340 09/10/14   1:21 am
341Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
and plasma flow rates (Qb in the range of 40–50 mL/min). 
Such blood flows can be obtained from a large peripheral vein 
(antecubital vein), eliminating the risks associated with cen-
tral vascular access in many cases.
MPS is faster for performing plasmapheresis. However, it 
is unsuitable for treating patients with the hyperviscosity syn-
drome due to paraproteinemia (most commonly Waldenström 
macroglobulinemia) or patients with cryoglobulinemia, 
because the available devices are not efficient in removing 
very large macromolecules. MPS normally is performed using 
heparin as an anticoagulant; when treating bleeding disorders 
such as TTP , heparin should not be used, and a citrate-based 
method is indicated instead.
 I V. V ASCULAR ACCESS.  A s noted earlier, for the centrifug al device sys-
tems, a Q b in the range of 40–50 mL/min is required. This can 
sometimes be obtained from a large peripheral vein (antecubital 
vein). On the contrary, a central venous access is needed when 
using MPS because a blood flow rate between 100 and 150 mL/min 
is required for the successful and efficient operation of the filtra-
tion system. For MPS the best approach is the use of a large-bore, 
dual-lumen catheter, similar to the ones used for dialysis and espe-
cially dedicated for apheresis. The majority of intravascular devices 
available for nondialysis use, such as Swan–Ganz catheters and 
triple- lumen catheters, almost never provide adequate blood flow 
for plasmapheresis, although they may be suitable for blood return.
Citrate infusion (see later) causes an acute reduction in the 
plasma ionized calcium level (in the face of normal total serum 
calcium level), which can have a local effect on the cardiac con-
duction system and can generate life-threatening arrhythmia, 
particularly when blood is returned centrally close to the atrio-
ventricular node of the heart. Cardiac rhythm should be moni-
tored, and blood-warming devices should be used, especially if 
processed blood is returned centrally.
When the nature of the disease requires chronic TPE (e.g., 
hypercholesterolemia, cryoglobulinemia), the creation of a per -
manent access is preferred. Patients may undergo placement of 
a central catheter for long-term use, or long-term access may be 
achieved using an arteriovenous fistula or polytetrafluoroethyl-
ene graft.
 V. ANTICOAGULATION. A nticoagulation is mandatory for therapeutic 
apheresis procedures, whether by MPS or centrifugal devices. 
In general, filtration devices use heparin, whereas centrifugal 
machines require the use of citrate.
A. Heparin. H eparin sensitivity and half-life vary greatly in patients, 
and individual adjustment of dosage is necessary. Heparin doses 
may need to be increased in patients with low Hct (increased 
volume of distribution) and when the plasma filtration rate 
is high (a high plasma filtration rate results in increased net 
removal of heparin, which has a sieving coefficient of 1.0).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   341 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
342
B. Citrate. A nticoagulant citrate dextrose (ACD) is used as the 
anticoagulation solution for most TPE procedures. Citrate 
chelates calcium, which is a necessary cofactor in the coagula-
tion cascade, and this inhibits thrombus formation and plate-
let aggregation. ACD comes in two standard formulations. 
Formula A (ACD-A) contains 2.2 g/dL of sodium citrate and 
0.73 g/dL of citric acid. Formula B (ACD-B) contains 1.32 g/dL 
of sodium citrate and 0.44 g/dL of citric acid. ACD-A is used 
for all continuous-flow centrifugal devices.
Although bleeding is uncommon with citrate, low plasma 
ionized calcium levels commonly occur. Therefore, patients 
must be carefully observed for symptoms and signs of hypocal-
cemia (perioral and/or acral paresthesias; some patients may 
experience shivering, light-headedness, twitching, tremors, 
and, rarely, continuous muscular contractions that result in 
involuntary carpopedal spasm). If plasma ionized calcium lev-
els fall more severely, symptoms can progress to frank tetany 
with spasm in other muscle groups, including life- threatening 
laryngospasm. Grand mal seizures have been reported. These 
symptoms and signs may be accentuated by alkalosis due to 
hyperventilation. Reductions of ionized calcium values also 
lengthen the plateau phase of myocardial depolarization, 
manifested electrocardiographically by prolongation of the 
QT interval. Very high citrate levels, with corresponding low 
ionized calcium, lead to depressed myocardial contractility, 
which, though very rare, can provoke fatal arrhythmias in 
patients undergoing apheresis.
1. Prevention of low ionized calcium levels during citrate anticoagula-
tion. T he following measures can be considered.
a. Limiting the rate of citrate delivery to the patient.  T he rate of 
citrate infusion must not exceed the capacity of the body 
to metabolize citrate rapidly. The ability to metabo-
lize citrate varies from patient to patient. Because the 
amount of citrate infused is proportional to the blood 
flow rate, high blood flow rates should not be used. Most 
of the centrifugal devices estimate the patient’s blood 
volume by a nomogram and then automatically set the 
blood flow rate to limit the rate at which citrate is being 
infused.
Patients with liver and renal insufficiency may have 
an impaired ability to metabolize citrate, and in these 
patients, citrate infusion should be performed with great 
caution. FFP ( fresh frozen plasma) contains up to 14% 
citrate by volume. In cases where FFP , instead of albu-
min, is being used as the replacement fluid, the total 
citrate reinfusion rate to the patient should include the 
citrate in the FFP .
b. Providing additional calcium to the patient during the plasma -
pheresis procedure. Ca lcium can be given either orally or 
intravenously. One can, for example, give orally 500-mg 
(5-mmol) tablets of calcium carbonate every 30 minutes. 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   342 09/10/14   1:21 am
343Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
Another approach is to infuse calcium gluconate 10% 
continuously intravenously, in a proportion of 10 mL of 
the calcium gluconate solution per liter of replacement 
fluid (Weinstein, 1996). In addition to these measures, 
intravenous boluses of calcium can be given whenever 
symptoms of hypocalcemia become manifest.
2. Alkalosis during citrate infusion.  T here is the danger of devel-
oping metabolic alkalosis (although this is a very rare 
occurrence) because citrate in the form of sodium citrate is 
metabolized to bicarbonate. In patients with liver disease, 
who may have impaired ability for citrate metabolism, 
acid–base status during plasmapheresis using citrate anti-
coagulation should be monitored with special care.
 VI. REPLACEMENT SOLUTION. T he selection of the type and amount of 
replacement fluids is an important consideration in the prescrip-
tion of plasmapheresis. The diversity of disease and patient condi-
tions makes the elaboration of uniform suggestions for replacement 
fluid difficult. Nevertheless, certain guidelines are useful, and they 
can be modified by the specific conditions encountered.
In most plasmapheresis procedures, replacement by col-
loidal agents is essential to maintain hemodynamic stability. In 
practice, this is limited to albumin, generally in the form of an 
isonatric 5% solution, or to plasma in the form of FFP . The advan-
tages and disadvantages of each are listed in Table 18.5.
A. Fresh frozen plasma.  F FP has the advantage of being similar in 
composition to the filtrate being removed from the patient , 
but is associated with side effects such as allergic reactions. 
Urticaria and hives, which may be severe, are frequently pres-
ent with the use of FFP . Rarely, anaphylactic reactions result 
in a form of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema caused by 
Solution Advantages Disadvantages
Albumin No risk of hepatitis Expensive
Stored at room temperature No coagulation factors
Allergic reactions are rare No immunoglobulins
No concern about ABO 
blood group
Depletes inflammation 
mediators
Fresh frozen plasma Coagulation factors Risk of hepatitis, HIV 
transmission
Immunoglobulins Allergic reactions
“Beneficial” factors Must be thawed
Complement Must be ABO-compatible
Citrate load
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
Choice of Replacement Solution
18.5
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   343 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
344
passive transfusion of leukoagglutinins. Another cause of ana-
phylaxis is infusion of IgA-containing FFP to a patient with 
selective IgA deficiency. Because FFP may contain appreciable 
amounts of anti-A and anti-B isoagglutinins, ABO compat -
ibility between donor and recipient is necessary. As noted 
earlier, FFP contains citrate, and use of FFP increases the risk 
of citrate-mediated low ionized calcium reactions. Also, there 
is a small but measurable incidence of transmission via FFP 
of hepatitis B (0.0005% per unit), hepatitis C (0.03% per unit), 
and HIV (0.0004% per unit). Although these infectious risks 
are now much smaller with predonation and postdonation 
testing, it should be kept in mind that with each plasmapher -
esis treatment where 3 L of plasma is replaced with FFP , the 
3 L of replacement FFP is made up of 10–15 units of plasma 
coming from an equal number of donors. Detergent-treated 
plasma is available from a number of manufacturers.
Use of FFP as the replacement fluid makes measurement 
of the efficacy of plasmapheresis more difficult in certain 
patients (e.g., one cannot simply follow serum levels of IgG and 
other immunoglobulins). Also, FFP may replenish some factors 
removed during plasmapheresis that could participate in the 
inflammatory process.
At present, the specific indications for replacing some or 
all of the removed plasma with FFP during plasma exchange 
are (a) thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura–hemolytic 
uremic syndrome (TTP/HUS), (b) preexisting defect in hemo-
stasis and/or low pretreatment serum fibrinogen level (< 125 
mg/dL), and (c) patients at risk for bleeding; for example, 
patients who are  pre- or postsurgery . With regard to TTP/
HUS, there is a rationale for using FFP as the sole replace-
ment fluid because infusion of FFP by itself may be therapeu-
tic and because in the presence of thrombocytopenia the risk 
of bleeding as a consequence of minor perturbations in the 
coagulation factors may be higher.
In general, because plasmapheresis also depletes coagu-
lation factors, replacement by albumin and crystalloid alone 
may result in depletion of these factors and place the patient at 
increased risk of bleeding. This is not likely to occur after one 
or two plasma exchanges, particularly if they are performed 
more than a day apart, because the half-life for most clotting 
factors is approximately 24–36 hours.
B. Albumin. B ecause of the above concerns with the use of FFP , 
we recommend albumin as the initial replacement solution. 
Five percent albumin solution at a concentration of 5 g/dL 
(50 g/L) in saline with 130–160 mmol of sodium chloride per 
liter can be replaced in a volume equal to that of the removed 
plasma. With modern equipment, this can be done simulta-
neously and at the same rate as plasma removal. However, 
because a substantial proportion of the albumin that is infused 
early during the procedure is exchanged during the course of 
a plasmapheresis procedure, a more economical approach 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   344 09/10/14   1:21 am
345Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
(when exchange volume is equal to one plasma volume and 
in the absence of hypoalbuminemia) is to replace the initial 
20%–30% of the removed plasma volume with crystalloid, such 
as 0.9% saline and then substitute the balance with the above-
mentioned 5% albumin solution. This method would result 
in a final concentration of albumin in the vascular space of 
approximately 3.5 g/dL (35 g/L), sufficient to maintain oncotic 
pressure and avoid hypotension. The approach should not be 
used in patients with hyperviscosity, patients with neurologic 
diseases, and patients with other causes of hypotension.
Purified human serum albumin (HSA) solutions do not 
transmit viral diseases because of prolonged heat treatment 
during processing and have become a favored replacement 
fluid in TPE. They have an excellent overall safety record. The 
incidence of adverse reactions of any kind has been estimated 
to be 1 in 6,600 infusions. Severe, potentially life-threatening 
reactions occur in approximately 1 of every 30,000 infusions. 
When preparing 5% albumin solution from more concentrated 
solutions, 0.9% saline must be used as the diluent; use of water 
as a diluent has resulted in severe hyponatremia and hemolysis 
(Steinmuller, 1998).
The amount of fluid replacement given depends on the 
patient’s volume status. The replacement volume can be 
adjusted, either manually or automatically, from 100% of the 
removed volume to less than 85%. Use of lower replacement 
volumes is generally not recommended, since this may con-
tract the intravascular volume and result in hemodynamic 
instability.
 VII. COMPLICATIONS. T he side effects observed in plasma exchange 
are generally not severe and can be managed easily if they are 
anticipated. The main side effects are listed in Table 18.5.
Complications range from 4% to 25%, with an average of 
10%. Minimal reactions occur in about 5% of treatments and are 
characterized by urticaria, paresthesias, nausea, dizziness, and 
leg cramps. Moderate reactions (5%–10% of treatments) include 
hypotension, chest pain, and ventricular ectopy. All are usually 
brief and without sequelae. Severe events occur in <3% of treat -
ments and are mainly related to anaphylactoid reactions asso-
ciated with FFP administration. The estimated mortality rate 
associated with plasmapheresis is 3–6 per 10,000 procedures. 
The majority of deaths include anaphylaxis associated with FFP 
replacement, pulmonary embolism, and vascular perforation. 
The most important complications are summarized in Table 18.6. 
Strategies for avoidance and management of these complications 
are summarized in Table 18.7.
A. Citrate. The most common complication of therapeutic apher -
esis when using centrifugal machines is related to citrate tox -
icity as described in the anticoagulation section.
B. Hemodynamic complications. H ypotension (2% overall incidence) 
is due mainly to intravascular volume depletion, which may be 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   345 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
346
Related to Vascular Access
Hematoma
Pneumothorax
Retroperitoneal bleed
Local or systemic infection
Related to the Procedure
Hypotension from externalization of blood in the extracorporeal circuit
Hypotension due to decreased intravascular oncotic pressure
Bleeding from reduction in plasma levels of coagulation factors
Edema formation due to decreased intravascular oncotic pressure
Loss of cellular elements (platelets)
Hypersensitivity reactions (ethylene oxide)
Related to Anticoagulation
Bleeding, especially with heparin
Hypocalcemic symptoms (with citrate)
Arrhythmias
Hypotension
Numbness and tingling of extremities
Metabolic alkalosis from citrate
Related to Replacement Fluids
Hypotension (use of hypo-oncotic saline)
Anaphylaxis (FFP)
Complications of Plasmapheresis
18.6
TABLE
Complication Management
Low ionized calcium Prophylactic infusion of 10% calcium 
gluconate during treatment
Hemorrhage 2–4 units of fresh frozen plasma at the end of 
the procedure
Thrombocytopenia Consider membrane plasma separation
Volume-related hypotension Adjust volume balance
Infection postapheresis Infusion of intravenous immunoglobulin 
(100–400 mg/kg)
Hypokalemia Ensure a potassium concentration of 4 mM in 
the replacement solution
Membrane biocompatibility Change membrane or consider centrifugal 
method of plasma separation
Hypothermia Warm replacement fluids
ACE inhibitors Discontinue ACE inhibitor therapy 24–48 hr 
before treatments
Sensitivity to FFP or albumin Consider measuring anti–IgA titers
Premedication regimen for sensitized 
individuals: (a) hydrocortisone I.V. or 
prednisone; (b) diphenhydramine I.V. or 
orally; and (c) H2 antagonists (cimetidine) I.V.
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; Ig, immunoglobulin.
Strategies to Avoid Complications during Plasmapheresis
18.7
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   346 09/10/14   1:21 am
347Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
exaggerated by the large (250–375 mL) volume of blood exter-
nalized in the extracorporeal circuit. Other causes include 
vasovagal episodes, use of hypo-oncotic fluid replacement, 
delayed or inadequate volume replacement, anaphylaxis, car -
diac arrhythmia, and cardiovascular collapse.
C. Hematologic complications.  H emorrhagic episodes are rare. 
Bleeding after insertion of a femoral catheter, bleeding from a 
previous catheter site, hematemesis, and epistaxis have been 
described.
After a single plasma exchange, the serum fibrinogen 
level typically falls by 80%, and prothrombin and many other 
clotting factor levels also fall by about 50%–70%. The partial 
thromboplastin time usually increases by 100%. Recovery of 
plasma levels of coagulation factors is biphasic, characterized 
by a rapid initial increase up to 4 hours postapheresis and fol-
lowed by a slower increase 4–24 hours postexchange. Twenty-
four hours after treatment, fibrinogen levels are approximately 
50%, and antithrombin III levels are 85%, of initial levels; both 
require 48–72 hours for complete recovery. One day following 
treatment, the prothrombin level is 75% and factor X is 30% of 
the original level; by this time, all other coagulation factors will 
have completely recovered to normal values. When multiple 
treatments are performed over a short period, the depletion in 
clotting factors is more pronounced and may require several 
days for spontaneous recovery. As stated before, when multiple 
closely spaced treatments are given, it is advisable to replace 
2 units of FFP at the end of each treatment. Device-specific 
thrombocytopenia has been reported as a result of TPE, and 
this has caused confusion in assessing response during treat -
ment of disorders such as TTP (Perdue, 2001).
D. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.  Anaphylactic or 
atypical anaphylactoid reactions have been reported in patients 
taking ACE inhibitors during hemodialysis, low-density lipopro-
tein (LDL) affinity apheresis, and other apheresis- specific col-
umns. These reactions have been related to negatively charged 
membranes or filters. Experimental evidence has shown that 
this reaction is not related to the extracorporeal circulation 
alone. It is speculated that the fragments of prekallikrein-acti-
vating factor present in human albumin lead to endogenous 
bradykinin release. The severity of the reactions depends on dif-
ferent variables, including drug type and lot of albumin (which 
may contain different concentrations of the prekallikrein-  
activating factor). Ideally, therefore, short-acting ACE inhibitors 
should be held for 24 hours, and long-acting ACE for 48 hours, 
prior to plasma exchange with membrane devices.
E. Infection. T he true incidence of infection in TPE is contro-
versial. Studies have not clearly shown a significantly higher 
occurrence of opportunistic infections among patients treated 
with immunosuppression and TPE compared to those treated 
with immunosuppressive therapy alone. However, if a severe 
infection develops in the immediate post–plasma exchange 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   347 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
348
period, a reasonable approach would be a single infusion of 
immunoglobulins (100–400 mg/kg intravenously).
F. Electrolyte, vitamin, and drug removal
1. Hypokalemia. W hen the replacement solution is albumin in 
saline, there could be a 25% reduction in serum potassium 
levels in the immediate postapheresis period. The risk of 
hypokalemia can be reduced by adding 4 mmol of potas-
sium to each liter of replacement solution.
2. Metabolic alkalosis. T his may result from infusion of large 
amounts of sodium citrate.
3. Drugs. I n general, drugs that are significantly cleared by 
plasma exchange are the ones that have small volumes of dis-
tribution and extensive protein binding. Evidence shows that 
supplemental dosing of prednisone, digoxin, cyclosporine, 
ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, valproic acid, and phenobarbital is 
not necessary after plasma exchange. In contrast, the dos-
ages of salicylates, azathioprine, and tobramycin should be 
supplemented. The many reports of phenytoin clearance are 
conflicting; thus, it is necessary to carefully monitor unbound 
drug levels. We generally recommend that all scheduled med-
ications be given immediately after the procedure.
 VIII. INDICA TIONS FOR PLASMAPHERESIS.  T he most comprehensive 
guidelines for the use of therapeutic apheresis are published by 
the American Society of Apheresis (ASFA). The ASFA evidence-
based approach assigns categories to diseases after systematic 
review of the literature. Furthermore, the quality of the support-
ing evidence is graded. Category I includes disorders for which 
apheresis is accepted as first line of therapy. Category II includes 
diseases for which apheresis is accepted as a second-line ther -
apy (usually after failure of the first line of therapy). Category III 
includes entities for which the optimal role of apheresis is not 
established. In these cases, decision making should be indi-
vidualized. Category IV includes disorders in which published 
evidence demonstrates apheresis to be ineffective or harmful. 
Table 18.8 lists disorders for which apheresis is considered first 
Goodpasture syndrome (anti-GBM disease)
TTP/HUS
Severe Cryoglobulinemia
Pulmonary renal syndrome with diffuse alveolar damage (DAM)
Antibody-mediated renal graft rejection
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Sickle cell disease crisis (RBC exchange)
Acute demyelinating polyneuropathy (Guillain–Barré Syndrome)
Hyperleukocytosis (leukemia) (leukocytapheresis)
Myasthenia gravis crisis
Thrombocytosis (thrombocytapheresis)
Indications for Urgent Plasmapheresis 
and Cytapheresis18.8
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   348 09/10/14   1:21 am
349Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
line of therapy, either alone or with other treatment modalities. 
In these cases, apheresis should be initiated as soon as possible 
for achieving optimal outcomes. Below is a summary of the use of 
plasmapheresis in renal disorders.
A. Anti-GBM disease.  T here is convincing evidence of the patho-
genicity of anti-GBM antibodies in this disease, which his-
torically was rapidly fatal in untreated patients. Early use 
of plasmapheresis is strongly indicated, since the response 
rate is highest when the serum creatinine is relatively low 
(<500 mcmol/L or 5.7 mg/dL). In the largest long-term study 
using plasmapheresis together with immunosuppressive 
drugs, almost all patients with creatinine <500 mcmol/L 
(5.7  mg/dL) recovered kidney function, compared with only 
8% of those who were already on dialysis. In oliguric dialysis-
dependent patients, particularly with a high percentage of 
crescents on renal biopsy, plasmapheresis should probably be 
reserved for those with pulmonary hemorrhage, because renal 
function is unlikely to recover.
The frequency of plasmapheresis should be high enough 
to rapidly decrease circulating anti-GBM antibody lev-
els. In the large series described earlier, patients received 
exchange of 50  mL/kg (approximately 1.5 plasma volumes) 
for 14   consecutive days, or until anti-GBM antibody levels 
became undetectable. Other authors would advise exchange 
of two plasma volumes daily for 7 days, followed by alternate 
day plasmapheresis for another week. Although renal biopsy 
is preferred to confirm the diagnosis, if the clinical suspicion 
is high and a reliable assay for anti-GBM antibodies is positive, 
then treatment should be started immediately. If still indicated 
clinically, renal biopsy could be performed after the first two or 
three exchanges, deferring plasmapheresis for 24 hours after 
biopsy. Citrate anticoagulation may be preferred, where avail-
able, in the presence of lung hemorrhage or after renal biopsy. 
Plasmapheresis may need to be continued beyond the second 
week, depending on clinical features and anti-GBM antibody 
levels.
In general, plasma is replaced with 5% albumin, but using 
FFP for the last liter of the exchange in patients with lung hem-
orrhage or recent biopsy. If the patient is severely fluid over -
loaded, the amount of albumin solution can be reduced to 85% 
(but not less) of the removed plasma volume.
B. TTP and HUS.  B oth TTP and HUS lead to thrombotic microan-
giopathy which, in HUS, particularly affects the kidney and, in 
TTP , often affects the central nervous system. HUS is divided 
into cases preceded by diarrhea (D+ ) and those that  occur 
 sporadically (D −). D-HUS may be associated with genetic 
defects of complement regulators or autoantibodies to these 
proteins (atypical HUS [aHUS]). I n TTP , there may be genetic 
deficiency of the von Willebrand factor–cleaving protease 
(ADAMTS13) or autoantibodies against it. Plasmapheresis will 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   349 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
350
replace normal plasma components, regardless of etiology, 
and will remove autoantibodies when present.
In severe TTP , plasmapheresis should be started as soon 
as possible. Daily plasmapheresis of at least 1 plasma vol-
ume should be performed daily, usually for 7–10 days. Some 
would advocate using 1.5 plasma volumes for the first three 
treatments to achieve a rapid effect. Treatment is continued 
until platelet count is normalized and hemolysis has largely 
ceased (lactate dehydrogenase below 400 IU/L). Since relapse 
may recur promptly on stopping treatment, vascular access 
should be maintained until platelet count is stable. In patients 
in whom platelet count decreases to <100,000/mm 3, plasma-
pheresis may be recommenced on an alternate day schedule 
until platelet count stabilizes. There are now two controlled 
trials that show the benefit of plasmapheresis with FFP com-
pared with FFP infusions, and a recent meta-analysis of con-
trolled trials shows that plasmapheresis with FFP is the most 
effective approach in TTP .
Diarrhea-positive (D+ ) HUS in children is frequently a 
self-limiting disease, which improves with supportive treat -
ment. There are no randomized trials of plasmapheresis, but 
there are recent reports of the benefit of plasmapheresis in 
adults with severe acute D+  HUS. In diarrhea-negative (D− ) 
HUS (atypical HUS), there are no controlled trials, but there are 
several anecdotal reports of the benefit of plasma exchange for 
FFP in severely affected patients.
Despite the lack of evidence, a trial of plasmapheresis 
would be a reasonable approach in severe TTP in pregnancy. 
Plasmapheresis may also be useful for other secondary causes 
of TTP , although plasma perfusion over staphylococcal pro-
tein A (SPA) columns has been reported to be more effective 
in mitomycin-induced TTP .
In general, removed plasma is replaced by the same vol-
ume of FFP , since the FFP  will provide the deficient plasma 
components. In repeated large volume exchange for TTP, care 
needs to be taken to avoid hypocalcemia.
Eculizumab (a monoclonal antibody against C5 that  
 inhibits the formation of the membrane attack complex of 
complement) is being used to treat (D− ) HUS, and results 
have been very  encouraging. Recently, (D+ ) HUS arising 
from the epidemic that took place in Europe several years ago 
seemed to respond well to both eculizumab (Delmas, 2014) 
and plasmapheresis.
C. Cryoglobulinemia. P lasmapheresis has been used for the treat -
ment of cryoglobulinemia for over 20 years because of effec-
tive removal of the large immune complexes responsible 
for clinical features. Although there are no controlled tri-
als, there are multiple reports demonstrating the efficacy 
of plasma exchange in patients with acute vasculitis and 
renal involvement. Plasmapheresis can also be considered 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   350 09/10/14   1:21 am
351Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
for hyperviscosity syndrome or where a patient is about to 
undergo surgery requiring hypothermia. In severe cases, 
immunosuppressive drugs are also used, together with antivi-
ral therapy in those with hepatitis C.
In general, exchange of 1 plasma volume for 7 days is sug-
gested, while others use plasmapheresis on alternate days for 
2–3 weeks. Replacement fluid should be 5% albumin, which 
must be warmed to avoid precipitation of circulating cryo-
globulins. In occasional patients, long-term treatment once a 
week is required to control symptoms. Use of a centrifugation 
device is often preferred because of the possibility of the cryo-
globulins blocking the plasma filter as they cool and precipi-
tate. Alternative techniques such as double cascade filtration 
and cryofiltration are expensive and technically difficult, and 
are not widely used.
D. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)–associated vasculitis  .  
These patients have a small vessel vasculitis often affecting 
the kidney, with pauci-immune rapidly progressive glomeru-
lonephritis. This group of diseases include s granulomato -
sis with polyangiitis (previously Wegener granulomatosis), 
microscopic polyangiitis, and eosinophilic granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis (previously Churg–Strauss syndrome). There 
is mounting evidence for the pathogenic role of ANCA in 
these conditions. Although early trials did not produce clear-
cut results, Pusey (1991) demonstrated the benefit of plasma 
exchange, together with immunosuppressive drugs in patients 
already requiring dialysis. A large European multicenter 
study (MEPEX) confirmed this finding and demonstrated , 
in patients with a creatinine of >500 mcmol/L (5.7 mg/dL), 
better recovery of renal function in those treated with plas-
mapheresis compared to patients treated with pulse methyl 
prednisolone. Another recent smaller study reported the 
benefit of plasmapheresis in patients with a creatinine >250 
mcmol/L (2.8 mg/dL). A recent meta-analysis confirmed the 
benefit of adjunctive plasmapheresis compared with standard 
therapy in preventing development of end-stage renal dis -
ease. A large international controlled trial of plasmapheresis 
in ANCA-associated vasculitis in patients with GFR <50 mL/
min (PEXIVAS) is in progress.
On the basis of the MEPEX study, we would recommend 
daily exchange of 1.5 plasma volumes for 7 days. FFP should be 
used for the last liter of exchange for those with pulmonary hem-
orrhage or a recent renal biopsy. Some patients may require lon-
ger periods of treatment, depending on their clinical response.
E. Multiple myeloma.  M ultiple myeloma can lead to renal impair -
ment through a wide variety of mechanisms, the commonest 
of which is light-chain cast nephropathy. Although plasma-
pheresis effectively removes the paraprotein responsible, 
early trials produced conflicting results. A more recent, larger 
study failed to show significant benefit of plasmapheresis in 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   351 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
352
addition to standard chemotherapy. However, few of th ose 
patients had cast nephropathy confirmed by renal biopsy. 
A retrospective study from the Mayo Clinic suggested the 
benefit of plasmapheresis in patients with proven cast 
nephropathy who had high light-chain levels and severe renal 
impairment.
In general, we would suggest a regimen of five consecutive 
exchanges for 5% albumin in patients presenting with acute 
kidney injury due to light-chain nephropathy. Depending on 
the clinical response and paraprotein levels, longer treatment 
may be needed in some patients.
An alternative approach to plasmapheresis that has 
gained favor in the past 5 years is based on effective removal 
of light chains by hemodialysis using a special high-cutoff  
dialyzer. In addition to standard chemotherapy, with or with -
out bortezomib, very intensive dialysis is done. In the initial 
study, in patients with acute renal failure secondary to mul -
tiple myeloma, two high-cutoff filters (Theralite, Gambro Renal 
Products) were connected in series, and 8-hour dialysis sessions 
were given daily for the first 5 days, followed by 8-hour sessions 
on alternate days for the next 12 days, followed by 6-hour treat-
ments three times per week. Four grams of salt-poor albumin 
were given at the end of each extended dialysis session, and 
intravenous magnesium and oral calcium were given if predi-
alysis levels were low (Hutchison, 2009). The level of free light 
chains was monitored using an immunoassay. Response was 
encouraging, in terms of sizeable reduction in serum-free light 
chains and a high percentage of patients recovering renal func-
tion. Two multicenter controlled trials (EULITE and MYRE) are 
ongoing in Europe to investigate this approach.
F. Systemic lupus erythematosus.  P lasmapheresis has been widely 
used in lupus nephritis to remove circulating autoantibodies 
and immune complexes. Despite positive anecdotal reports, 
one randomized controlled trial showed no benefit of the 
addition of plasmapheresis to immunosuppressive drugs in 
patients with lupus nephritis followed up for 3 years. However, 
patients with crescentic nephritis and those requiring dialy-
sis were excluded, and it could be argued that short-term 
intervention such as plasmapheresis would have a better 
effect in these patients. An international trial using high-dose 
cyclophosphamide synchronized with plasmapheresis was 
suspended because of a high incidence of adverse effects, so 
this approach cannot be recommended. In our experience, 
and in many anecdotal reports, plasmapheresis should be 
considered in patients with life-threatening manifestations 
of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), for example, those 
with crescentic nephritis, pulmonary hemorrhage, cerebral 
lupus, or catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome. There are 
also reports of the use of immunoadsorption using protein A 
columns in patients with severe disease unresponsive to other 
treatment.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   352 09/10/14   1:21 am
353Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
We would suggest an initial course of seven exchanges 
of 1–1.5 plasma volumes for 5% albumin in patients with life-
threatening disease. FFP should be used for the last liter of the 
exchange in the presence of lung hemorrhage or recent renal 
biopsy.
G. Recurrent focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS).  Recurrent 
FSGS in renal transplants appears to be mediated in some 
cases by a circulating factor that  increases glomerular per -
meability. The use of plasmapheresis in FSGS in the native 
kidney has produced variable results, perhaps because some 
of these patients have a genetic defect in proteins contributing 
to the glomerular filtration barrier. FSGS can recur promptly 
following renal transplantation (15%–55% of cases) and, in 
these patients, plasmapheresis is frequently reported to be of 
benefit.
In the absence of adequate information, we would suggest 
the use of exchange of 1 plasma volume for 5% albumin for at 
least 5 consecutive days, and perhaps for longer, depending on 
clinical response, in patients with rapid recurrence of protein-
uria following renal transplantation.
H. Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP) and IgA nephropathy. P atients with 
HSP and primary IgA nephropathy may develop RPGN due to 
crescentic glomerulonephritis. The histologic features may be 
similar to those with ANCA-associated vasculitis. The success-
ful use of plasmapheresis, usually with immunosuppressive 
drugs, has been reported in several small series of patients. 
We have observed improvement in renal function in some 
patients treated with this approach.
It would be reasonable to perform seven exchanges of 
1–1.5 plasma volumes for 5% albumin in patients with active 
crescentic nephritis and deteriorating renal function, based on 
the experience in ANCA-associated vasculitis.
I. Hyperviscosity syndrome.  T his occurs most commonly with 
Waldenström macroglobulinemia (50% of cases) and occa-
sionally with myeloma and cryoglobulinemia. Hyperviscosity 
leads to RBC aggregation and reduced blood flow, leading to 
ischemic dysfunction of several organ systems, including the  
central nervous system, retina, and kidney. Although there are 
no controlled trials, there are several reports of the benefit of 
plasmapheresis in controlling clinical features pending the 
effects of treatment for the underlying disorder.
In the absence of adequate evidence, we would suggest 
using daily exchange of one plasma volume for 5% albumin for 
3–5 days or until blood viscosity normalizes and the patient is 
clinically stable.
J. Renal transplantation.  P lasmapheresis has been used for over 
20 years for treating antibody-mediated rejection and, more 
recently, as part of the desensitization protocol for ABO-
incompatible or highly sensitized patients. Indications for 
plasmapheresis in renal transplant rejection are not yet clear-
cut, but several trials have suggested a benefit in patients with 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   353 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
354
acute antibody-mediated rejection, often with concomitant 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy. However, there 
was no apparent benefit in chronic rejection. Both plasma-
pheresis and protein A immunoadsorption have been used to 
remove preformed anti-HLA antibodies in highly sensitized 
patients, with around 70% graft survival at 1 year. There are 
also reports that plasmapheresis is effective in allowing renal 
transplantation in ABO-incompatible patients, often with the 
use of additional immunosuppression such as rituximab.
We would suggest five exchanges of 1 plasma volume for 
5% albumin, together with IVIG, for acute antibody-mediated 
rejection. The use of plasmapheresis in desensitization proto-
cols for high-risk patients should only be carried out in special-
ized centers.
K. Poisoning and drug overdose.  T here are no ASFA class I indica-
tions for plasmapheresis in this area.  However, there are case 
reports of plasmapheresis being used in Amanita phalloides 
mushroom poisoning, to help clear digoxin-Fab complexes in 
patients with renal failure, to treat snakebite or cisplatin over-
dose, and to remove infused monoclonal antibodies when this 
is required (Schutt, 2012).
 IX. THE SELECTIVE APHERESIS PROCEDURES
A. Rationale. W hile conventional plasmapheresis can remove tar -
get plasma elements such as immunoglobulins, cryoproteins, 
and lipids, it does so without specificity and requires replace-
ment solutions such as albumin and donor plasma, which can 
be expensive and lead to adverse reactions. Selective apher -
esis procedures have been developed to target and remove a 
specific element from the plasma, and return all other plasma 
proteins, thus eliminating the need for replacement solutions 
and the loss of beneficial plasma constituents.
B. LDL apheresis. I n the United States, LDL apheresis is currently 
approved for patients with homozygous familial hypercholes -
terolemia or in patients with LDL ≥300 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) 
or LDL ≥200 mg/dL (5.2 mmol/L) plus documented coro-
nary artery disease despite maximal medical therapy. Other 
healthcare systems have less stringent criteria. In general, 
these procedures are performed once every one to two weeks, 
depending on LDL level, though intervals may be lengthened if 
the patient is tolerating lipid-lowering therapy. LDL apheresis 
should be considered a chronic lifelong therapy, and therefore, 
peripheral IVs or arteriovenous fistulas are recommended for 
access over tunneled dialysis catheters.
There are a variety of techniques available worldwide for 
the selective removal of LDL-cholesterol; in the United States, 
only the Liposorber system (Kaneka Corporation, Osaka, Japan) 
and the Heparin-induced Extracorporeal LDL-Cholesterol 
Precipitation (H.E.L.P .) system (B. Braun, Bethlehem, PA) are 
FDA-approved for LDL apheresis. With the Liposorber system, 
blood is passed through a membrane plasma separator before 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   354 09/10/14   1:21 am
355Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
entering one of two dextran sulfate–  based immunoadsorp-
tion columns  (LA-15 column) on the MA-03 machine. Dextran 
sulfate is a negatively charged molecule with low toxicity that 
selectively binds the positively charged Apo-B–containing lipo-
proteins (LDL, VLDL, and Lp[a]) with high affinity, thus remov-
ing them from the circulating plasma. H eparin is used for 
anticoagulation. A 1.5 plasma volume is targeted for processing, 
to achieve an LDL reduction of 73%–83% after a single treat -
ment. The negatively charged surface of the adsorbers promotes 
bradykinin release, thus ACE inhibitors are contraindicated in 
patients on this modality, but angiotensin receptor blockers 
may be used instead. In the H.E.L.P . system, whole blood is 
passed through a plasma separator, and lipoproteins as well as 
fibrinogen are selectively precipitated with heparin buffered at 
a pH of 5.12. The precipitate is then removed from the plasma 
by a polycarbonate membrane, and the heparin removed by a 
heparin adsorber, and, finally, the plasma is restored to a physi-
ologic pH via bicarbonate dialysis. LDL reduction with this 
procedure ranges from 45% to 67% after a single treatment. 
There is greater removal of C3, C4, plasminogen, factor VIII, and 
fibrinogen with the H.E.L.P . system. Removal of fibrinogen has 
a positive effect on hemorheology and has been utilized in the 
treatment of sudden hearing loss, a disorder characterized by 
a markedly increased fibrinogen, erythrocyte aggregation, and 
plasma viscosity (though this is not currently an FDA-approved 
indication). Both techniques of LDL apheresis available in the 
United States require heparin for anticoagulation . W ith the 
H.E.L.P . system, ACE inhibitors are not contraindicated.
Several other techniques are available worldwide to 
selectively remove LDL-cholesterol. In Europe, an immunoad-
sorption column containing anti-apoprotein B100-antibodies 
(Therasorb-LDL, Miltenyi Biotec, Germany) is available for 
the treatment of hyperlipidemia. Owing  to high costs, these 
columns are typically regenerated and stored, which can be 
a cumbersome process. Two whole-blood systems are also 
in use that do not require plasma separation: DALI (Direct 
Adsorption of Lipoprotein, Fresenius, Germany) and a whole-
blood version of the Liposorber system (Liposorber D, Kaneka 
Pharma Europe N.V .). There is also an immunoadsorptive 
device (Lipopak, Pocard, Moscow, Russia) that is marketed to 
target lipoprotein(a), which is an independent risk factor for 
coronary heart disease.
C. Immunoadsorption columns. T here are a variety of columns avail-
able worldwide that have been designed to selectively bind 
a target molecule and remove it from the circulating plasma 
(Fig. 18.3). The columns currently available either contain SPA, 
a specific peptide or synthetic antigen, or an immobilized anti-
body covalently bound to an inert and insoluble matrix (such 
as cellulose) in a column of gel beads. SPA has a high affinity for 
the Fc portions of IgG1, IgG2, and IgG4 and depletes the plasma 
of IgG autoantibodies or circulating immune complexes that 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   355 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
356
FIGURE 18.3 Immunoadsorbent columns retain pathogens by binding them to elements 
in the column. (Courtesy of Dobri Kiprov, MD. Reprinted from Linz W, et al. Principles  
of Apheresis Technology. 5th ed. American Society for Apheresis; 2014. http://www 
. apheresis.org.)
Plasma
Pathogenic
substances
Purified plasma
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   356 09/10/14   1:21 am
357Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
contain IgG. There is an SPA column (Immunosorba, Fresenius 
Medical Care) available in other countries used for the treat -
ment of antibody-mediated rejection in kidney transplant, 
dilated cardiomyopathy, SLE, pemphigus vulgaris, and anti-
FVIII antibody. Examples of immunoadsorption columns 
that utilize immobilized antibodies include anti-apoprotein B 
(Therasorb-LDL) used for hyperlipidemia as mentioned earlier 
and anti-IgG antibody columns (Therasorb-Ig) used in Europe 
for the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as SLE, myas-
thenia gravis, dilated cardiomyopathy, and ABO-incompatible 
kidney transplantation. Finally, many immunoadsorption col-
umns have been developed that contain either an immobilized 
antigen or peptide designed to bind a specific circulating anti-
body or molecule. An example is the Glycosorb ABO column, 
which contains terminal trisaccharide A or B blood group anti-
gen immobilized on sepharose, which binds circulating anti-A 
or anti-B antibodies, and which can be used to facilitate ABO-
incompatible organ transplantation.
D. Double filtration plasmapheresis (DFPP).  D FPP or “cascade fil-
tration” refers to the process of using a primary membrane 
plasma separator to isolate the plasma, followed by a second-
ary plasma fractionator to remove target solutes based on 
molecular size and weight. It has been used for the treatment 
of hypercholesterolemia, cryoglobulinemia, Waldenström 
macroglobulinemia, and diseases with impaired microcircu-
lation. There are a variety of secondary plasma fractionators 
available with varying pore size to allow for targeted filtration 
of the desired molecule. While it is more selective than con-
ventional plasmapheresis, valuable proteins such as IgM can 
be lost in the filter, and the capacity of the system is limited by 
filter clotting with retentate.
E. Cryofiltration. C ryoglobulins can be removed by conventional plas-
mapheresis, DFPP , or by a technique called cryofiltration. There 
are two basic methods for cryofiltration. In the first method, 
plasma is separated either by a centrifugal- or membrane- based 
system, and the plasma is pumped at 20–30  mL/min through 
a cooling system at 4°C and then passed through a cryofilter 
(Versapor, Pall Medical) to collect the precipitated cryopro -
teins/cryoglobulins. The cryo-depleted plasma is then warmed 
to 37°C, mixed with the cells, and returned to the patient. The 
second technique of cryofiltration focuses on cryogel removal. 
Cryogel is precipitated fibrinogen, extra-domain-A fibronectin, 
fibrin split products, and fibronectin. This technique uses a hep-
arin infusion (2,000 unit bolus followed by 1,000–2,000 units/hr) 
to form the core of the cryogel upon which the other proteins 
aggregate. A plasma fractionator then removes the cryogel from 
the circulating plasma.
 X. OTHER APHERESIS PROCEDURES
A. Extracorporeal photopheresis (ECP).  E CP is an online processing 
modality initially developed for the treatment of cutaneous 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   357 09/10/14   1:21 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
358
T-cell lymphoma (Sezary syndrome). It is also used as a treat -
ment for selected patients with cell-mediated alloimmune 
disorders such as graft-versus-host disease and cellular-type 
rejection in heart and lung transplantation. During this proce-
dure, centrifugation is used to collect WBCs. The WBC product 
is then injected with 8-methoxypsoralen (8-MOP) and exposed 
to a controlled dose of ultraviolet-A (UV-A) light prior to being 
returned to the patient. UV-A light activates 8-MOP , leading 
to cross-linking of DNA, thereby inducing apoptosis in T-cells 
and modifying dendritic cells. This is thought to induce clonal-
specific changes in ongoing immune responses, including pro-
duction of T-regulatory cells which shift the balance toward 
tolerance. There are two systems developed by Therakos 
(UVAR XTS and CELLEX). Heparin is used for anticoagulation; 
access is typically by peripheral IVs or Vortex catheter. Typical 
treatments are done in pairs on successive days, and repeated 
every 2 or more weeks; clinical benefit accrues gradually.
XI. STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION AND OTHER CELL THERAPIES.
Hematopoetic Stem Cells (HPSCs) are collected from patients
by leukocytapheresis and used for the treatment of hematologic
malignancies, regeneration medicine, and a growing number of
other entities.
HPSC can be derived either from bone marrow or from 
peripheral blood. Mobilized blood HPSCs have few contaminating 
red cells and have more committed HPSCs, lymphocytes, and other 
mononuclear cells. These enriched cell populations lead to faster 
engraftment and immune reconstitution. Because of these advan-
tages and lower morbidity and mortality rates, the great majority 
of patients undergoing stem cell transplantation have been treated 
with apheresis-derived autologous peripheral blood HPSC.
Cell therapies such as cancer vaccines (Provenge, Dendreon, 
Seattle, WA) and emerging gene cellular therapies utilize aphere-
sis-derived autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
References and Suggested Readings
Braun N, et al. Immunoadsorption onto protein A induces remission in severe systemic 
lupus erythematosus. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2000;15:1367–1372.
Cataland SR, Wu HM. Diagnosis and management of complement mediated throm-
botic microangiopathies. Blood Rev. 2014;28:67–74.
Clark WF, et al. Plasma exchange when myeloma presents as acute renal failure: 
a  randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2005;143:777–784.
Colic E, et al. Management of an acute outbreak of diarrhoea-associated haemolytic 
uraemic syndrome with early plasma exchange in adults from southern Denmark: 
an observational study. Lancet. 2011;378:1089–1093.
Delmas Y, et al. Outbreak of Escherichia coli  O104:H4 haemolytic uraemic syndrome 
in France: outcome with eculizumab. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014;29:565–572.
Hattori M, et al. Plasmapheresis as the sole therapy for rapidly progressive Henoch-
Schönlein purpura nephritis in children. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;33:427–433.
Hutchison CA, et al. Treatment of acute renal failure secondary to multiple myeloma 
with chemotherapy and extended high cut-off hemodialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2009;4:745–754.
Hutchison C, Sanders PW . Evolving strategies in the diagnosis, treatment, and moni-
toring of myeloma kidney. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2012;19:279–281.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   358 09/10/14   1:21 am
359Chapter 18 / Therapeutic Apheresis
Kale-Pradhan PB, Woo MH. A review of the effects of plasmapheresis on drug clear -
ance. Pharmacotherapy. 1997;17:684–695.
Kiprov DD, et al. Adverse reactions associated with mobile therapeutic apheresis: 
analysis of 17,940 procedures. J Clin Apher. 2001;16:130–133.
Kiprov DD, Hofmann J. Plasmapheresis in immunologically mediated polyneuropa -
thies. Ther Apher Dial. 2003;7:189–196.
Klemmer PJ, et al. Plasmapheresis therapy for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in patients 
with small-vessel vasculitis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42:1149–1154.
Levy JB, et al. Long-term outcome of anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody 
disease treated with plasma exchange and immunosuppression. Ann Intern Med. 
2001;134:1033–1042.
Linz W , et al. Principles of Apheresis Technology. 5th ed. American Society for Apheresis; 
Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2014. http://www.apheresis.org.
Maggioni S, et al. How to implement immunoadsorption in a polyvalent dialysis unit: 
a review. J Ren Care. 2014;40:164–71.
Matsuzaki M, et al. Outcome of plasma exchange therapy in thrombotic microangi-
opathy after renal transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2003;3:1289–1294.
McLeod BC, et al. Apheresis: Principles and Practice. 3rd ed. Bethesda, MD: AABB Press; 
2010.
Menne J, et al. EHEC-HUS consortium. Validation of treatment strategies for entero-
haemorrhagic Escherichia coli  O104:H4 induced haemolytic uraemic syndrome: 
case-control study. Br Med J. 2012;345:e4565.
Montagnino G, et al. Double recurrence of FSGS after two renal transplants with 
complete regression after plasmapheresis and ACE inhibitors. Transpl Int. 
2000;13:166–168.
Perdue JJ, et al. Unintentional platelet removal by plasmapheresis. J Clin Apher. 
2001;16:55–60.
Pusey CD, et al. Plasma exchange in focal necrotizing glomerulonephritis without anti-
GBM antibodies. Kidney Int. 1991;40:757–763.
Saddler JE, et al. Recent advances in thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. 
Hematology. 2004:407–423.
Sanchez AP , Cunard R, Ward DM. The selective therapeutic apheresis procedures. 
J Clin Apher. 2013;28:20–29.
Schutt RC, et al. The role of therapeutic plasma exchange in poisonings and intoxica-
tions. Semin Dial. 2012;25:201–206.
Schwartz J, et al. Guidelines on the use of therapeutic apheresis in clinical practice-
evidence-based approach from the Writing Committee of the American Society for 
Apheresis: the sixth special issue. J Clin Apher. 2013;28:145–284.
Siami GA, Siami FS. Current topics on cryofiltration technologies. Ther Apher . 
2001;5:283–286.
Stegmayr B, et al. Plasma exchange as rescue therapy in multiple organ failure includ-
ing acute renal failure. Crit Care Med. 2003;31:1730–1736.
Steinmuller DR, et al. A dangerous error in the dilution of 25 percent albumin [letter]. 
N Engl J Med. 1998;38:1226–1227.
Strauss RG. Mechanisms of adverse effects during hemapheresis. J Clin Apher. 
1996;11:160–164.
United States Centers for Disease Control. Renal insufficiency and failure associated 
with IGIV therapy. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 1999;48:518–521.
Ward DM. Extracorporeal photopheresis: how, when, and why. J Clin Apher. 
2011;26(5):276–285.
Weinstein R. Prevention of citrate reactions during therapeutic plasma exchange 
by constant infusion of calcium gluconate with the return fluid. J Clin Apher. 
1996;11:204–210.
Williams ME, Balogun RA. Therapeutic plasma exchange, principles of separation: 
indications and therapeutic targets for plasma exchange. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2014;9:181–189.
Winters JL. Lipid apheresis, indications, and principles. J Clin Apher. 2011;26:269–275.
Wolf J, et al. Predictors for success of plasmapheresis on the long-term outcome of 
renal transplant patients with recurrent FSGS [Abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2005;SA-FC026.
Zucchelli P , et al. Controlled plasma exchange trial in acute renal failure due to mul-
tiple myeloma. Kidney Int.1988;33:1175–1180.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch018.indd   359 09/10/14   1:21 am