360
19
On average, conventional dialysis machines process 30 to 50 L/hr 
or 100 to 200 L per session of dialysis solution made from highly pu-
rified water. In contrast, sorbent dialysis requires as little as 6 L of 
potable tap water to produce and regenerate high-quality dialysate 
for an entire treatment. With sorbent dialysis, spent dialysate from 
the dialyzer is not discarded to a drain but is regenerated by passing 
it through a sorbent cartridge. The layers of compounds in the car -
tridge take advantage of three basic principles of chemistry: carbon 
binding, enzyme conversion, and ion exchange, to remove uremic 
toxins and regenerate high-quality bicarbonate dialysate during a 
dialysis treatment.
Sorbent devices operate without being connected to a water 
supply or a drain; therefore, additional benefits are system mobility 
and the flexibility of treatment delivery in a wide range of environ-
ments. Sorbent systems have been used for acute dialysis in critical 
care units and at the patient bedside, for home hemodialysis, for 
military operations, for disaster relief, in rehabilitation centers and 
nursing homes, in remote locations, and to treat patients on vacation 
in remote locations . Without the need for plumbing installation or 
electrical modification, the potential treatment environments with 
sorbent systems are numerous.
Sorbent systems provide an opportunity to drive innovation, 
portability, flexibility, and miniaturization in the dialysis domain.
 I. PRINCIPLES OF SORBENT DIAL YSIS. I n sorbent dialysis, the spent 
dialysate is continuously regenerated to form fresh dialysis solu -
tion by passing it through a sorbent cartridge. The initial dialysis 
solution is mixed in a designated jug using dry powders and 6 L 
or less of potable tap water. Prior to starting dialysis, this initial 
solution is recirculated through the sorbent cartridge for the pur-
pose of removing contaminants. This initial recirculation slightly 
alters the starting dialysis solution’s electrolyte composition, as 
described in more detail below. Once dialysis has been initiated 
and the patient has been connected into the system, the “spent” 
dialysate is then routed from the dialyzer outlet port through the 
sorbent cartridge. In the cartridge, metabolic waste products dis-
solved in the spent dialysate are adsorbed and/or exchanged for 
The Relevance of Sorbent 
Technology Today
Jose A. Diaz-Buxo, Stephen A.  
Merchant, David Updyke,  
and Susan E. Bentley
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch019.indd   360 09/10/14   1:24 am
361Chapter 19 / The Relevance of Sorbent Technology Today
sodium, hydrogen, and bicarbonate ions. The sorbent cartridge 
also removes potassium, calcium, and magnesium. Regeneration 
of the final dialysate solution is completed when potassium, cal-
cium, and magnesium are added to the dialysis solution exiting 
the cartridge by an infusion pump.
A. The sorbent cartridge.  The sorbent cartridge (Fig. 19.1) consists 
of six layers of materials, which are designed to remove con -
taminants and uremic solutes while at the same time main-
taining an appropriate dialysate composition. Spent dialysate 
flows through the cartridge from bottom to top. The first and 
third layers with which the dialysate comes into contact 
contain activated carbon. These layers adsorb heavy metals, 
chloramines, and other contaminants that can be found in 
the tap water. In addition, the activated carbon adsorbs many 
of the organic and middle molecule uremic solutes found 
in spent dialysate, including creatinine and uric acid. The 
 second layer is an enzyme-retention layer. The enzyme pres-
ent is urease, which catalyzes the conversion of urea to am-
monium bicarbonate. The fourth layer  contains zirconium 
phosphate and is a cation exchange layer. Its primary function 
is to adsorb the ammonium ion generated by urea hydrolysis 
that took place in the second layer. In addition, this cation 
exchange material adsorbs other positively charged species 
such as magnesium, calcium, and potassium, as well as heavy 
metal cations that may be found in tap water such as copper 
and iron. In exchange for the adsorbed cations, the zirconium 
phosphate releases hydrogen and sodium. The fifth layer  is 
an anion exchange layer containing zirconium oxide. This ma-
terial adsorbs phosphate, fluoride, and other anions, such as 
oxoanions of heavy metals, and in exchange release chloride 
and hydroxyl anions. The sixth layer contains sodium bicar -
bonate. It does not bind anything but releases sodium and 
bicarbonate.
B. Removal of contaminants from the prime solution during predialysis re-
circulation through the sorbent cartridge.  The initial dialysis solu -
tion or “prime” is made by combining dry chemicals with 6 L 
or less of municipal tap water. This tap water must meet EPA 
drinking water standards. This initial mixture is not suitable 
as a dialysis solution, as it may contain contaminants. How -
ever, a brief predialysis recirculation of the prime through the 
sorbent cartridge removes almost all contaminants normally 
present in potable tap water (assuming that it contains no 
more than the maximum allowable contaminant limits [MA -
CLs] for potable water as indicated by the US EPA) to levels re-
quired for dialysis solution as indicated by ANSI/AAMI RD52. 
There are two exceptions: recirculation of the prime through 
the sorbent cartridge does not remove sulfate or  nitrate to an 
appreciable extent. However, as long as initial levels of sulfate 
and nitrate are less than the maximal allowed levels for tap 
water (10 mg/L for nitrate and 250 mg/L for sulfate), because 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch019.indd   361 09/10/14   1:24 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
362
FIGURE 19.1 Structure of a sorbent cartridge.
Binds:  Heavy metals, oxidants and chloramines,
uric acid, organics, middle molecules, pyrogens, endotoxin
Releases: Nothing
Used dialysate
IN
OUT
NaHCO3, NaCl,
CO2, H2O
Converts urea to ammonium and bicarbonate (released)
Binds: NH4
+, Al3+, Ca2+, Mg2+, K+ and
other cations and metal complexes
Releases:  Na+ and H+
Binds: Fl−, PO4
−, anions and anionic
heavy metal complexes
Releases: Cl− and OH−
Binds: Nothing
Releases: Na+ and HCO3
−
Layer 6
Sodium
Bicarbonate
Layer 4
Zirconium
Phosphate
Layer 3
Activated Carbon
and Purification
Layer 2
Urease
Layer 1
Activated Carbon
and Purification
Layer 5
Zirconium Oxide
Binds:  Heavy metals, oxidants and chloramines,
uric acid, organics, middle molecules
Releases: Nothing
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch019.indd   362 09/10/14   1:24 am
363Chapter 19 / The Relevance of Sorbent Technology Today
only 6 L of tap water are used, the total sulfate (or nitrate) load 
potentially transferable to the patient is small.
C. Changes to the electrolyte composition of the prime solution during 
predialysis recirculation.  Concentrations of sodium bicarbon -
ate and sodium chloride are user-selectable by choosing dif-
ferent packets of dry chemicals to dissolve. Upon priming 
the cartridge, a portion of the sodium in the prime will be 
adsorbed by the zirconium phosphate layer of the cartridge 
in exchange for hydrogen ions. The release of these hydrogen 
ions into the priming dialysis solution would result in a lower-
ing of the starting bicarbonate concentration initially present 
in the prime solution as the protons react with bicarbonate 
to form carbonic acid (i.e., CO
2 and water). However, release 
of sodium bicarbonate from the sixth layer of the cartridge 
serves as a buffer and prevents the bicarbonate concentration 
of the prime solution from dropping during the predialysis 
recirculation period. In fact, the initial bicarbonate concen -
tration of the prime at the end of the predialysis recirculation 
phase often will be slightly higher than the initial bicarbonate 
level of the prime at the time of mixing. Calcium, magnesium, 
and potassium are not added to the prime solution, since the 
cartridge would remove them during the initial recirculation 
period. Instead, once treatment begins, these elements are 
infused at appropriate rates into the stream exiting the car -
tridge; as a result, the final dialysis solution that reenters the 
dialyzer contains appropriate concentrations of these ions.
1. Adjusting dialysis solution sodium. Sodium in the dialysis solu-
tion originates from three sources: the sodium-containing 
electrolytes added to the prime solution, sodium added
to the dialysate by the cartridge from cation exchange
and from the sodium bicarbonate layer,  and diffusion of
sodium from patient blood to dialysate in the dialyzer.
The zirconium phosphate layer adsorbs the ammonium
that was generated from enzymatic conversion of urea,
and it also adsorbs magnesium, calcium, and potassium.
In exchange for these adsorbed cations, the zirconium
phosphate layer releases sodium and hydrogen. Since the
replacement of magnesium, calcium, and potassium in
the dialysate is generally proportioned at a constant rate,
the sodium dynamics of the dialysate are essentially con-
trolled by ammonium adsorption , and the latter can vary
considerably from treatment to treatment and from pa -
tient to patient. 
 Ammonium is generated from enzymatic
digestion of urea, and the amount of urea presented to
the cartridge will depend on the patient’s initial urea con -
centration as well as on  the rate of transfer of urea from
the blood to dialysate in the dialyzer. The amount of urea
removed from blood is highest during the initial part of a
dialysis session. Hence, it is during this early time period
of the dialysis session that the rate of ammonium produc-
tion via urease in the cartridge is highest, and when the
rate of ammonium exchange for sodium is also highest.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch019.indd   363 09/10/14   1:24 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
364
Accordingly, the dialysate sodium increase will be highest 
during the initial part of the dialysis session.
Given the anticipated increase in the concentration 
of sodium exiting the sorbent cartridge, especially during 
the initial portion of a treatment, prevention of patient 
sodium loading during sorbent dialysis is managed in two 
ways: First, the sodium concentration of the prime solution 
is set below the desired dialysate sodium level that will be 
present during much of the treatment. The lower dialy-
sate sodium concentration that this approach provides is 
quite transient, owing to the addition of sodium to the re-
circulating dialysis solution by the sorbent cartridge during 
the initial part of dialysis, as discussed above. The second 
approach to prevent sodium loading during sorbent dialy -
sis is to add small volumes of water to the dialysate as di-
alysis progresses, owing to continued addition of sodium 
to the dialysate by the ammonium/sodium exchange in the 
cartridge. The automated controlled addition of water to 
the recycled dialysis solution during dialysis maintains the 
dialysate sodium concentration at an appropriate level, 
and sodium transfer to the patient is prevented.
2. Adjusting dialysis solution bicarbonate. B icarbonate in the dialy -
sis solution originates from chemicals added to make up the 
prime solution, and from the cartridge via urea hydrolysis 
(which forms ammonium carbonate), anion exchange, and 
via the sodium bicarbonate layer. In this system, the hydro-
lytic decomposition of urea results in ammonium and bicar-
bonate ions.  Figure 19.2 illustrates the changes that take 
place in the dialysate as well as plasma bicarbonate levels 
during a typical sorbent dialysis treatment  with the 6 layer 
sorbent cartridge. The dialysate bicarbonate concentration 
is slightly elevated at the beginning of treatment. Hydroly-
sis of urea in layer 2 produces ammonium bicarbonate.  In 
FIGURE 19.2 In vitro patient and dialysate bicarbonate profiles in sorbent dialysis with 
the 6-layer cartridge.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
03 06 09 0 120 150 1802 10 240
Bicarbonate concentration (mEq/l)
Treatment time (min)
Dialysate bicarbonate
In vitro patient bicarbonate
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch019.indd   364 09/10/14   1:24 am
365Chapter 19 / The Relevance of Sorbent Technology Today
exchange for sodium ions, the zirconium phosphate layer 
releases hydrogen ions, which combine with carbonate ions 
to produce carbonic acid and CO 2. Breakdown of 10 g of 
urea generates approximately 150 mEq of bicarbonate. The 
net effect depends on the hydrogen ions available from the 
zirconium phosphate layer and the patient’s initial blood 
urea nitrogen (BUN), which drives the balance between 
carbonic acid and bicarbonate. Bicarbonate might actually 
decrease initially, but as treatment proceeds neutralization 
of hydrogen ions results in increased dialysate bicarbonate 
that is transferred to the patient (Fig. 19.2).
 II. SORBENT-BASED DIALYSIS MACHINES
A. The REDY system.  In 1973, the first sorbent-based hemodialysis 
machine, the Recirculating Dialysate System (REDY), and sor-
bent cartridges were introduced to the market. By 1975, an esti-
mated 10,000 hemodialysis treatments per month were utilizing 
the REDY system. The REDY system provided mobility not avail-
able with single-pass systems. The self-contained dialysis system 
was small enough to be transported on a standard hospital util-
ity cart and was used primarily for acute and home hemodialysis. 
Manufacturing of the REDY system was discontinued in 1994.
B. The Allient system.  In 2006, the Allient Sorbent  Hemodialysis 
System (Allient System), developed by Renal Solutions, 
 Warrendale, PA, received FDA clearance. The Allient  System 
combined sorbent technology with a unique, pressure-
controlled blood movement system. As with previous 
 sorbent-based devices, it was a completely self-contained, 
transportable machine. The Allient System was never fully 
commercialized, and Renal Solutions was purchased by Frese-
nius Medical Care, Waltham, MA, in late 2007.
C. The Fresenius 2008 Sorbent System.  The Fresenius 2008 Sorbent 
System received FDA clearance in August 2010. It was com -
prised of two separate components: a modified Fresenius 
2008K hemodialysis machine and a SORB module. The SORB 
module was a sorbent dialysate regenerative system located 
on the side of the 2008 machine platform that replaced  the 
single- pass dialysate delivery system. The Fresenius 2008 
 Sorbent System used the standard blood-tubing configura-
tions of the 2008 series dialysis machine platform, and deliv -
ered the same range of blood flow rates. In the SORB module, 
as with the previously described sorbent dialysis systems, 
spent dialysate and ultrafiltrate exited  the dialyzer. However, 
a portion of the spent dialysate (equal to the volume removed 
by ultrafiltration) was removed from the dialysate and sent to 
a drain jug. The sodium concentration of the remaining spent 
dialysate was automatically adjusted by addition of either a 
sodium chloride solution or water to maintain the prescribed 
sodium level. The sodium-adjusted spent dialysate was then 
returned to the sorbent cartridge for purification. The final re-
generated dialysis solution was kept in a disposable reservoir 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch019.indd   365 09/10/14   1:24 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
366
bag, from which it was returned to the dialyzer as needed. An 
integrated ammonia sensor monitoring the cartridge effluent 
notified the operator of cartridge saturation. A guide provided 
the prescribing physician with information necessary to target 
a desirable end -dialysis sodium bicarbonate dialysate range 
and the desired sodium bicarbonate transfer to the patient.
D. The Fresenius PAK Sorbent Hemodialysis System.  The PAK sys-
tem, currently under development by Fresenius Medical 
Care, is being designed as a portable, transportable, and 
 simple-to-use sorbent system weighing less than 70 lb. The 
device will include two units: a pump and a reservoir. The 
pump will be located above the reservoir, and both units 
will lock together. When the system is turned off, releasing 
the lock will allow separation of the two units for transport. 
A single-use blood/dialysate cassette will be mounted in 
the pump unit. This disposable cassette will combine the 
 blood-tubing set and dialysate circuit and will snap into 
place, simplifying setup. A  dialyzer will be connected to 
the tubing cassette, providing an integrated and sterile 
unit. A disposable reservoir bag, capable of holding 11 L of 
dialysis solution, will rest in a heated pan in the reservoir 
unit and will complete the dialysate circuit. All dialysate 
and blood contact surfaces will be external to the system, 
thereby eliminating the necessity for any internal system 
cleaning or disinfection between treatments. During treat -
ment, spent dialysate including ultrafiltrate will exit the 
dialyzer  (Fig. 19-3). Dilution water will automatically be 
FIGURE 19.3 Schematic representation of dialysate flow path for the Fresenius portable 
sorbent system.
Dilution
water
Electrolyte
solution
Fresh
dialysate
Spent
dialysate
Dialysate
bag
Ammonia
sensor
Sorbent
Cartridge
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch019.indd   366 09/10/14   1:24 am
367Chapter 19 / The Relevance of Sorbent Technology Today
added to the dialysate to maintain a controlled sodium 
level. The sodium-adjusted dialysate will be returned to the 
sorbent cartridge for purification. Dialysate flow rates of 
300 to 400 mL/min will be available, and the blood flow rate 
will be adjustable from 100 to 500 mL/min.
References and Suggested Readings
Agar JWM. Review article: understanding sorbent dialysis systems. Nephrology . 
2010;15:406–411.
Ash SR. The allient dialysis system. Semin Dial. 2004;17:164–166.
Hansen SK. Advances in sorbent dialysis. Dial Transplant. 2005;34:648–652.
McGill RL, et al. Sorbent hemodialysis: clinical experience with new sorbent cartridges 
and hemodialyzers. ASAIO J. 2008;54:618–621.
Organon Teknika Corp. Sorbent Dialysis Primer. 3rd ed. Durham, NC: Organon Teknika 
Corp.;1991.
Roberts M. The regenerative dialysis (REDY) sorbent system. Nephrology. 1998;4:275–278.
Tarrass F, et al. Water conservation: an emerging but vital issue in hemodialysis 
 therapy. Blood Purif. 2010;30:181–185.
Welch PG. Deployment dialysis in the U.S. Army: history and future challenges.  Military 
Medicine. 165:737–741.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch019.indd   367 09/10/14   1:24 am