368
20
Hemodialysis, hemoperfusion, and peritoneal dialysis (PD), particu-
larly the first two procedures, can be useful adjuncts in the manage-
ment of drug overdose and poisoning. However, these treatments 
should be applied selectively, as part of the general approach to the 
poisoned patient, which include supportive therapy, decontamina -
tion, elimination enhancement, and antidotes (Kulig, 1992). A review 
of data from the 2012 report of the American Association of Poison 
Control Centers shows that MDAC (multiple-dose activated charcoal) 
and alkalinization treatments far outnumber treatments by hemodi-
alysis, and these in turn far outnumber treatments using hemoperfu-
sion, with only 61 hemoperfusion treatments being reported versus 
2,324 treatments using dialysis (Mowry, 2013).
 I. DIAL YSIS AND HEMOPERFUSION
A. Indications. E xtracorporeal techniques should be considered 
when the conditions listed in Table 20.1 apply. Any procedure 
used in poisoning treatment should have a greater effect on 
drug elimination than that which occurs spontaneously. Early 
use of dialysis or hemoperfusion can be considered if the 
serum levels of a drug or poison are found to be increased 
to values known to be associated with death or serious tis-
sue damage. Critical serum concentrations for several drugs 
are listed in Table 20.2. The information given in Tables 20.1 
and 20.2 only represents a set of recommendations; the deci-
sion to institute dialysis or hemoperfusion must be made on 
an individual basis. In addition to providing extracorporeal 
drug elimination, dialysis can provide essential supportive 
care to poisoned patients with multiorgan or kidney injury. 
The EXTRIP (EXtracorporeal Treatment In Poisoning) work 
group is currently drafting guidelines for the use of blood puri-
fication in the context of overdose. Their publication should 
help to standardize management for these complex patients 
(Lavergne, 2012).
B. Choice of therapy
1. Peritoneal dialysis  is not very effective in removing drugs 
from the blood, with maximal poison clearance rarely 
Use of Dialysis and 
Hemoperfusion in the 
Treatment of Poisoning
James F. Winchester, Nikolas B. 
Harbord, Elliot Charen,  
and Marc Ghannoum
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   368 09/10/14   1:26 am
369Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
above 15 mL/min (about one-tenth of what usually can be 
reached with hemodialysis). Nevertheless, when hemodial-
ysis is difficult to institute quickly, such as in small children, 
a prolonged session of PD can be a valuable adjunctive 
treatment for poisoning. Also, under certain conditions, 
such as in the hypothermic-poisoned patient, PD may be 
useful, as it may also be used to help in core rewarming.
2. Hemodialysis is the therapy of choice for water-soluble 
drugs, especially those of low molecular weight along with 
a low level of protein binding, as such compounds will dif-
fuse rapidly across the dialyzer membrane. Examples are 
ethanol, ethylene glycol, lithium, methanol, and salicy-
lates. Water-soluble drugs that have high molecular 
weights (e.g.,  amphotericin B [MW 9,241] and vancomy-
cin [MW  1,500]) diffuse across dialyzer membranes more 
slowly and are less well removed; removal rate is acceler -
ated by use of high-flux membranes and hemodiafiltration. 
Serum Concentrationa
Drug (mg/L) (mcmol/L) Method of Choice
Phenobarbital
Glutethimide
Methaqualone
Salicylates
Theophylline
Paraquat
Methanol
Meprobamate
100
40
40
800
40
0.1
500
100
430
180
160
4.4 mmol/L
220
0.4
16 mmol/L
460
HP, HD
HP
HP
HD
HP, HD
HP > HD
HD
HP
aSuggested concentrations only: Clinical condition may warrant intervention at lower  
concentrations (e.g., in mixed intoxications).
Serum Concentrations of Common Poisons in Excess of 
Which Hemodialysis (HD) or Hemoperfusion (HP) Should Be 
Considered20.2
TABLE
 1. Progressive deterioration despite intensive supportive therapy
 2. Severe intoxication with depression of midbrain function leading to 
hypoventilation, hypothermia, and hypotension
 3. Development of complications of coma, such as pneumonia or septicemia, 
and underlying conditions predisposing to such complications  
(e.g., obstructive airways disease)
 4. Impairment of normal drug excretory function in the presence of hepatic, 
cardiac, or renal insufficiency
 5. Intoxication with agents with metabolic and/or delayed effects (e.g., 
methanol, ethylene glycol, and paraquat)
 6. Intoxication with an extractable drug or poison, which can be removed  
at a rate exceeding endogenous elimination by liver or kidney
Criteria for Consideration of Dialysis or Hemoperfusion 
in Poisoning20.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   369 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
370
Hemodialysis is not very useful in removing lipid-soluble 
drugs (e.g., amitriptyline) with large volumes of distribution 
or drugs with extensive protein binding.
3. Hemoperfusion is a process whereby blood is passed through
a device containing adsorbent particles. Most commonly,
the adsorbent particles are activated charcoal or some sort
of resin. Although hemoperfusion may be more effective
than hemodialysis in clearing the blood of many protein-
bound drugs (because the charcoal or resin in the cartridge
will compete with plasma proteins for the drug, adsorb the
drug, and thereby remove it from the circulation ), modern
high-flux dialyzers may also perform in a similar manner.
Hemoperfusion will remove many lipid-soluble drugs from
the blood much more efficiently than hemodialysis. In the
United States, hemoperfusion cartridges are expensive and
have been discontinued by some manufacturers, and with
a short shelf life of 2 years, may not be available in certain
urban cities (Shalkam, 2006). If a drug is equally well removed
from the blood by hemoperfusion and hemodialysis, then
hemodialysis is preferred: potential problems of cartridge
saturation are avoided, and the incidence of hemoperfusion 
complications such as thrombocytopenia and leukopenia is
reduced; plus, with hemodialysis, any coexisting acid–base
or electrolyte disturbances can be treated.
4. Continuous hemodiafiltration, hemoperfusion. Prolonged continu-
ous treatment is potentially useful in drugs with moderately 
large volumes of distribution (V
D) and slow intercompart -
mental transfer times, because posttherapy rebound of
plasma drug levels is avoided. Clear advantages of con-
tinuous treatment over repeated conventional treatments
for drug rebound remain to be demonstrated. Continuous
hemoperfusion has been used successfully in theophylline
and phenobarbital toxicity, and continuous hemodiafiltra -
tion has been used in ethylene glycol and lithium toxicity
(Leblanc, 1996).
C. Toxicokinetics. Poisons have various molecular characteris-
tics that make them more or less amenable to extracorporeal 
removal. Dialyzability of a poison is possible only if it can be 
extracted from the plasma compartment, if a significant pro-
portion of its total body stores can be eliminated, and if extra-
corporeal clearance contributes a significant amount to total 
clearance. Removal from the plasma compartment is best 
reflected by the dialyzer extraction ratio, which can be calcu-
lated as (A-V)/A, where A represents the inflow (prefilter or 
precolumn) concentration of the solute to be removed, and V 
represents the dialyzer outflow concentration. The amount of 
toxin that can be removed by extracorporeal treatment is greatly 
affected by the volume of its distribution in the body. The ratio 
of extracorporeal removal to endogenous removal depends on 
the endogenous clearance of a particular poison and the current 
condition of the body organs (liver and/or kidney) that normally 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   370 09/10/14   1:26 am
371Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
participate in endogenous removal. The following factors will 
influence poison dialyzability (Lavergne, 2012):
1. Molecular weight.  Extracorporeal modalities have different
molecular weight cutoffs; techniques that use diffusion
such as hemodialysis usually have an approximate cutoff
of 5,000 Da, while convection- and adsorption-based tech-
niques are capable of removing poisons that are in excess of 
50,000 Da in size. Plasmapheresis can remove poisons that
are up to 1,000,000 Da in size.
2. Protein binding.  Since the poison–protein complex cannot
freely pass through dialyzers or hemofilters, only poisons
that are largely unbound (or free) can be removed by these
techniques. However, at higher concentration (such as in
overdose), protein binding of a drug can become saturated; 
under such conditions, a higher proportion of the drug is
unbound or “free, ” which is then available for removal by
extracorporeal treatment.
3. Volume of distribution. VD is the theoretical volume into which 
a drug is distributed. Heparin, for example, a drug con-
fined to the blood compartment, has a V
D of approximately
0.06  L/kg. Drugs distributed primarily in the extracellu-
lar water (e.g., salicylates) will have a V
D of approximately
0.2  L/kg. Some drugs will have VD values exceeding the
volume of total body water because they are extensively
bound to, or stored in, tissue sites. With drugs that have a
high V
D (e.g., digoxin, tricyclics), the amount of drug pres-
ent in the blood represents only a small fraction of the total 
body load. Thus, even if a hemodialysis or hemoperfusion
treatment extracts most of the drug present in the blood
flowing through the extracorporeal circuit, the amount of
drug removed during a single treatment session will rep-
resent only a small percentage of the total body drug bur -
den. Subsequently, additional drug will enter the blood
from tissue stores, sometimes causing a recurrence of the
toxic manifestations. On the other hand, even transiently
lowering the blood concentration of many drugs may miti-
gate certain important toxic effects of these agents. Hence, 
hemodialysis or hemoperfusion can sometimes effectively
reduce drug toxicity even when the V
D is large.
4. Endogenous clearance. Extracorporeal removal usually is not
indicated when endogenous clearance by metabolism and
elimination is expected to exceed the rate of exogenous elimi-
nation. This explains why hemodialysis is not indicated for
poisons like cocaine or toluene. Similarly, the presence of kid-
ney impairment for renally eliminated poisons (e.g., lithium)
will make extracorporeal removal more important.
D. Technical points
1. Vascular access for hemodialysis or hemoperfusion in poisoning. In
patients without permanent vascular access in place, per -
cutaneous cannulation of a large central vein using a dialy-
sis catheter is required.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   371 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
372
2. Choice of hemodialyzer . H igh-flux, high-efficiency dialyzers 
with high urea  clearances should generally be used. The 
development of high-cutoff hemodialysis membranes (with 
increased pore size of 8 to 10 nm) may allow clearance of 
larger toxins and molecules as large as 50 to 60 kDa (e.g., 
Fab fragments).
3. Choice of a hemoperfusion cartridge.  S ome of the available 
cartridges are listed in Table 20.3. Typical sorbents are 
activated carbons (charcoals), ion exchange resins, or 
nonionic exchange macroporous resins. Sorbent particles 
have been rendered biocompatible by coating the surface 
with a polymer membrane. The cartridges contain various 
amounts of sorbent, the smaller ones being designed for 
pediatric use. A detailed comparative evaluation of in vivo 
performance of the various brands of cartridges has been 
published (Ghannoum, 2014).
4. The hemoperfusion circuit. T he hemoperfusion circuit is simi -
lar to the blood side of a hemodialysis circuit and includes 
an air detector and a venous air trap. Standard hemodi-
alysis blood pumps and machines (without use of dialysis 
solution) are often used to drive the blood through the tub-
ing and cartridge.
5. Priming the hemoperfusion circuit.  S etup and priming with 
saline or dextrose differ depending on the brand of car -
tridge used, and the manufacturer’s literature should be 
consulted in all instances. The hemoperfusion cartridge 
must be primed in a vertical position with the arterial 
(blood inlet) side facing downward.
6. Heparinization during hemoperfusion.  O nce the cartridge has 
been primed, a bolus dose of heparin (usually 2,000–  
3,000 units) is administered into the arterial line, the car -
tridge is kept inlet side down, and blood flow through the 
cartridge is begun. As a rule, because of some adsorption 
on the sorbent, more heparin may be required for a hemo-
perfusion treatment (e.g., approximately 6,000 units or 
Manufacturer Device Sorbent Type
Amount of 
Sorbent Polymer Coating
Asahia Hemosorba Charcoal 170 g Poly(2-hydroxyethyl 
methacrylate) 
(poly-HEMA)
Gambro Adsorba  
150/300c
Charcoal 150/300 g Cellulose acetate
Brauna Haemoresin Resin XAD-4 
Amberlite
350 g None
Note: Smaller devices for use in children. 
a Not available in the US
Some Available Hemoperfusion Devices  
(May Vary by Country)20.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   372 09/10/14   1:26 am
373Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
10,000  units for charcoal and resin, respectively, per ses-
sion) than for hemodialysis. Heparin should be given in 
amounts sufficient to maintain the patient’s activated clot-
ting time (ACT) or partial thromboplastin time at about 
twice the normal value.
7. Duration of hemoperfusion.  A s ingle 3-hour treatment will 
substantially lower the blood levels of most poisons for 
which hemoperfusion is effective. More prolonged use of 
a hemoperfusion cartridge is inefficient, because the char -
coal tends to become saturated. Replacement of saturated 
devices with fresh ones is not usually required, and any 
rebound in blood drug concentrations consequent to tis -
sue release can be treated with a second hemoperfusion 
session. On the other hand, a continuous hemoperfusion 
treatment may need to be prolonged for several days until 
clinical improvement or a nontoxic blood level is achieved. 
Hemoperfusion devices may need to be changed every 
4 hours in the course of continuous treatment.
E. Complications. A ll extracorporeal techniques require vascular 
access through a central line, and this procedure itself is sub-
ject to complications.
1. Hemodialysis
a. Hypophosphatemia. I n contrast to end-stage renal disease 
(ESRD), patients being dialyzed for poisoning often do 
not have an elevated plasma phosphate value. Because 
phosphate is not present in standard dialysis solutions, 
intensive dialysis can severely lower the plasma phos-
phate level, resulting in respiratory insufficiency and 
other complications. Hypophosphatemia during dialysis 
can be avoided by supplementing the dialysis solution 
with phosphate as discussed in Chapter 10.
b. Alkalemia. S tandard hemodialysis solutions contain 
unphysiologically high concentrations of bicarbonate 
and they also contain bicarbonate-generating base in 
the form of acetate or citrate, as they have been designed 
to correct metabolic acidosis. Performing dialysis for 
poisoning in a patient with metabolic or respiratory 
alkalosis can provoke or worsen alkalemia unless the 
dialysis solution bicarbonate concentration is appropri-
ately reduced.
c. Disequilibrium syndrome in acutely uremic patients. I n patients 
with both severe uremia and poisoning, it may be dan-
gerous to carry out a prolonged high-clearance dialy-
sis session initially. During a dialysis treatment for a 
metformin- associated lactic acidosis in a markedly ure-
mic patient, enrichment of dialysate with an appropriate 
amount of urea in an attempt to attenuate the manifes -
tations of the disequilibrium syndrome has been suc-
cessfully performed (Doorenbos, 2001).
2. Hemoperfusion. M ild transient thrombocytopenia and leu -
kopenia can occur, but cell counts usually return to normal 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   373 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
374
within 24 to 48 hours following a single hemoperfusion. 
Adsorption or activation of coagulation factors has also 
been observed rarely and may be clinically significant in 
patients with liver failure.
3. Continuous therapy . F luid and electrolyte imbalances may 
be potential problems and require frequent monitoring. 
Prolonged anticoagulation may predispose to bleeding.
 II. MANAGEMENT OF POISONING WITH SELECTED AGENTS
A. Acetaminophen (MW 151 Da). A ctivated charcoal should be given 
to patients presenting within 4 hours of ingestion. Serum levels 
should be measured and plotted using  the Rumack–Matthew 
nomogram to establish the risk of hepatotoxicity and need 
for N-acetylcysteine (NAC) therapy. Concomitant ingestion 
of moderate amounts of ethanol markedly increases the risk 
of liver damage. If serum acetaminophen levels are above 
150 mg/L (1.0 mmol/L) at 4 hours, the likelihood of toxicity is 
high and NAC (PO or IV) should be given. NAC, by increasing 
reduced glutathione stores, prevents the accumulation of toxic 
acetaminophen by-products. Its efficacy in preventing liver 
failure declines if started more than 10 hours after ingestion, 
but NAC is still recommended even after 24 hours. Although 
acetaminophen is moderately water-soluble and is minimally 
protein-bound and thus removed by dialysis or hemoperfu-
sion, NAC remains the treatment of choice.
B. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid, MW 180 Da).  I n adults, severe aspirin 
poisoning is usually accompanied by metabolic acidosis with 
respiratory alkalosis, whereas in children, isolated metabolic 
acidosis is often encountered. The appearance of central ner -
vous system (CNS) symptoms is a sign of severe poisoning. The 
Done nomogram (Done and Temple, 1971), relating serum lev-
els and time of ingestion to outcome, gives some idea of the 
seriousness of salicylate poisoning in children, but is less used 
in adult poisoning. MDAC should be initiated and urine alka-
linization carried out if substantial urine output is achievable, 
particularly when symptoms are present and serum salicylate 
levels are >50 mg/dL (2.8 mmol/L). Aspirin has a V D of only 
0.15 L/kg. Despite the fact that the drug is about 50% protein-
bound, aspirin is well removed by hemodialysis. Hemodialysis 
should be considered when the serum level exceeds 90 mg/dL 
(6.5 mmol/L) or there is evidence of marked acidemia, neuro-
logic involvement (neurologic symptoms, hyperthermia, sei-
zures) or noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
C. Barbiturates. T oxic serum levels of phenobarbital (MW 232 Da) 
are over 3 mg/dL (130 mcmol/L), and coma begins to appear 
at levels of 6 mg/dL (260 mcmol/L). MDAC should be consid-
ered as first-line therapy, and alkalinization of the urine may 
help remove long-acting barbiturates such as phenobarbital. 
Phenobarbital is 50% protein-bound, but its V D is only 0.5 L/
kg; the drug is well removed by either hemodialysis or hemo-
perfusion. Hemodialysis should be contemplated when coma 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   374 09/10/14   1:26 am
375Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
is prolonged, especially when complications of coma, such 
as pneumonia, threaten. Removal with h emodialysis using a 
synthetic membrane dialyzer equals that of hemoperfusion 
(Palmer, 2000).
D. Digoxin (MW 781 Da).  The probabilities of digoxin-induced 
arrhythmias are 50% and 90% at serum levels of 2.5 and 3.3 ng/
mL (3.2 and 4.2 nmol/L), respectively. Treatment includes cor-
rection of hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and alkalosis and 
administration of oral-activated charcoal.
The V
D of digoxin is large (8 L/kg in normal patients, 
4.2  L/kg in dialysis patients), and the drug is 25% protein-
bound. For these reasons, only 5% of the body load will be 
removed by a 4-hour hemodialysis treatment. Although hemo-
perfusion is more effective and has been shown to improve 
symptoms, it is not routinely recommended in the treatment of 
digoxin toxicity as the V
D of the drug is so large that total body 
clearance is limited. Plasmapheresis performed soon after Fab 
fragment administration promotes removal of the Fab–digoxin 
complexes (Zdunek, 2000), and high-cutoff membranes such 
as Theralite can be used for this purpose also (Fleig, 2011). 
Most authors recommend an additional Fab treatment if tox -
icity recurs. In dialysis patients, Fab therapy remains preferred 
over hemoperfusion or plasmapheresis. Although Fab has 
been used successfully in patients with coexisting renal fail-
ure, digoxin may be released from the Fab–digoxin complex, 
leading to a rebound in toxicity, perhaps requiring a second 
treatment (Ujhelyi, 1993).
E. Toxic alcohols. Ethylene glycol and methanol are the common-
est causes of fatal toxic alcohol poisoning. Ethylene glycol is 
found in antifreeze solutions, deicing solutions, hydraulic 
brake fluid, foam stabilizers, and chemical solvents. Methanol 
is found in windshield washing fluids, paints, solvents, copier 
fluids, and illegally manufactured (wood) alcohol. Methanol 
and ethylene glycol are relatively nontoxic, but both are 
metabolized via the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase (ALDH) 
to produce the toxic metabolites formic acid and glycolic acid, 
respectively. In ethylene glycol poisoning, glycolate is further 
metabolized to oxalate, which can cause acute kidney injury.
Coingestion of ethanol may delay formation of toxic 
metabolites and its associated clinical features. Poisonings 
with toxic alcohols should be suspected in patients with 
unexplained metabolic acidosis accompanied by increases in 
anion and osmolal gaps. However, an elevated anion gap and 
an elevated osmolal gap are rarely concomitantly present early 
or very late after ingestion of toxic alcohols. If a toxic alcohol 
has not been metabolized, the osmolal gap but not the anion 
gap will be increased. On the other hand, if a toxic alcohol has 
undergone complete  metabolism, the anion gap but not the 
osmolal gap will be elevated. Therefore, a normal osmolal or 
anion gap does not eliminate the possibility of significant toxic 
alcohol ingestion.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   375 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
376
Alcohols are rapidly absorbed and have the same V D as 
water. MDAC or gastrointestinal decontamination has a lim -
ited role in the management of alcohol poisoning. There is a 
competitive inhibition for the ALDH enzyme between either 
ethanol or fomepizole (4-methylpyrazole) on the one hand and 
a toxic alcohol on the other. Fomepizole has a greater affinity 
for ALDH than ethanol. Either ethanol or fomepizole should be 
given as soon as possible after ingestion to delay the conver -
sion to toxic metabolites and to allow time for the disposal of 
the parent drug and its toxic metabolites that might have been 
formed, through the urinary, metabolic, and dialytic routes. 
Currently, there are insufficient data to define the relative roles 
of fomepizole and ethanol in the treatment of toxic alcohol 
poisoning. Ethanol can cause CNS depression, phlebitis, hypo-
glycemia, and respiratory depression, and requires close moni-
toring of serum ethanol levels. Fomepizole has advantages over 
ethanol in terms of validated efficacy, predictable pharmaco-
kinetics, ease of administration, and fewer adverse effects. 
Ethanol has advantages over fomepizole in terms of clinical 
experience and lower drug cost (cost advantage upward of 
1:100). Fomepizole is probably safer in children and pregnant 
women. For milder cases with adequate renal function, etha-
nol infusions alone (without extracorporeal treatment) over 
several days in the intensive care unit can be difficult to man-
age. In such patients a long period of intensive care monitoring 
can be avoided when treating with fomepizole.
In mild intoxications in which there is little evidence of 
metabolic breakdown of toxic alcohols (i.e., without meta-
bolic acidosis) and when endogenous routes of elimination are 
intact, in the course of treatment with ethanol or fomepizole, 
the patient should be expected to recover. On the other hand, 
when there is evidence of presence of breakdown products 
of these alcohols; e.g., with resultant metabolic acidosis,  and 
in the presence of poor renal function, removal of the toxic 
alcohols and their deleterious metabolites by hemodialysis is 
mandatory, as neither ethanol nor fomepizole has the capac-
ity to dispose of these substances from the body. Hemodialysis 
is highly effective in rapidly removing both toxic alcohols and 
their metabolites and in correcting metabolic abnormalities. 
Thus, the risks and costs of prolonged hospitalization and the 
cost of fomepizole must be weighed against those of hemodi-
alysis. Since hemodialysis is so efficient in removing the toxic 
alcohols, the prolonged intensive care monitoring required 
for ethanol administration is less necessary if hemodialysis is 
added to the treatment regimen. On account of its lower cost, 
the use of ethanol may have an economic incentive in devel -
oping countries. Overall, prognosis correlates better with the 
severity of acidosis and toxic metabolite concentrations than 
with the parent alcohol concentration.
1. Ethylene glycol (MW 62 Da).  T he first phase of toxicity due 
to ethylene glycol begins  <1 hour after ingestion and is 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   376 09/10/14   1:26 am
377Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
1. Documented plasma ethylene glycol or methanol concentrations >20 mg/dL
or
2. Documented recent (hours) history of ingestion of toxic amounts of ethylene 
glycol or methanol and osmolal gap >10 mmol/kg
or
3. History or strong clinical suspicion of ethylene glycol or methanol poisoning and 
at least two of the following criteria:
•	 Arterial
	pH	<7.3
•	 Serum 	bicarbonate	<20 mmol/L
•	 Osmolal 	gap	>10 mmol/kga
•	 Urinary 	oxalate	crystals	(in	the	case	of	ethylene	glycol)	or	visual	signs	or
symptoms (in the case of methanol) present
aLaboratory analysis by freezing point depression only.
Modified from Barceloux DG, et al. American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on 
the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1999;37:537; Barceloux DG, et al. 
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on the treatment of methanol poison-
ing. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2002;40:415.
Indications for Treatment of Ethylene Glycol or Methanol 
Poisoning with Ethanol or Fomepizole20.4
TABLE
characterized by CNS depression similar to ethanol intoxica-
tion. In severe poisoning, this phase can result in coma and 
seizures and can last 12 hours. The second phase is due to 
the toxic effects of the metabolite, glycolic acid, on the car-
diopulmonary system with the development of cardiac and 
respiratory failure 12 hours after ingestion. A severe meta-
bolic acidosis commonly occurs. After 24 to 48 hours, renal 
failure often supervenes as a result of oxalate precipitation 
in the kidney, delaying the excretion of the poison. This is 
characterized by flank pain, hypocalcemia, and acute tubu-
lar necrosis accompanied by oxalate crystals in the urine.
Early aggressive management of acidosis with sodium 
bicarbonate is essential. Indications for the administra -
tion of an antidote (ethanol or fomepizole) are shown 
in Table  20.4. Indications for hemodialysis are shown in 
Table  20.5. Traditionally, an ethylene glycol level above 
1. Severe metabolic acidosis (pH <7.25–7.30)
2. Renal failure
3. Visual symptoms/signs
4. Deteriorating vital signs despite intensive supportive care
5. Ethylene glycol or methanol levels >50 mg/dL unless fomepizole is being 
administered and patient is asymptomatic with a normal pHa
aSuch patients should be monitored very closely, and hemodialysis should be initiated if acidosis 
develops. Withholding of dialysis in such patients may result in prolongation of hospitalization.
Modified from Barceloux DG, et al. American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on 
the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1999;37:537; Barceloux DG, et al. 
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on the treatment of methanol poison-
ing. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2002;40:415.
Indications for Hemodialysis in Patients with Severe  
Ethylene Glycol or Methanol Poisoning20.5
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   377 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
378
50 mg/dL (8.1 mmol/L) is an indication for dialysis. In the 
absence of both renal dysfunction and metabolic acidosis, 
the use of fomepizole may obviate the need for dialysis, even 
in patients with serum ethylene glycol levels above 50 mg/
dL. However, if patients with serum levels of ethylene glycol 
above 50 mg/dL are not treated with hemodialysis but only 
with ethanol or fomepizole, the acid–base status should be 
monitored very closely and hemodialysis initiated promptly 
if acidosis develops. The  dosing schedule for ethanol or 
fomepizole and the dose  adjustments for hemodialysis are 
shown in Tables 20.6 and 20.7. Hemodialysis should be per-
formed until acidosis has resolved and the ethylene glycol 
levels are below 20 mg/dL (3.2 mmol/L). Redistribution of 
ethylene glycol may result in rebound elevation of ethylene 
glycol levels within 12 hours after cessation of dialysis, and 
repeat dialysis may be necessary. Thus, serum osmolality, 
electrolytes, and acid–base status should be monitored 
closely within 24 hours after dialysis. Pyridoxine (50 mg IM 
1. Loading dose: 0.6 g/kg [intravenous 10% ethanol in D5W (7.6 mL/kg) or 43% oral 
solution or 86 proof undiluted liquor (34 g ethanol/dL) 1.8 mL/kg]
2. Maintenance dose:
•	 In	alcoholic	patients	154	mg/kg	per	hour
•	 In 	nonalcoholic	patients	66	mg/kg	per	hour
•	 Double 	dose	during	hemodialysis	or	enrich	dialysate	with	100	mg/dL	ethanola
•	 Double 	dose	if	given	orally	with	charcoal
3. Monitor serum ethanol concentrations every 1–2 hours and adjust infusion rate 
to maintain serum ethanol level of 100–150 mg/dL. Thereafter, monitor ethanol 
levels every 2–4 hours
4. Continue until methanol or ethylene glycol concentrations are <20 mg/dL and 
patient is asymptomatic with normal arterial pH
aRerom Wadgymar A, et al. Treatment of acute methanol intoxication with hemodialysis. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 1998;31:897.
Guidelines for Use of Ethanol in Toxic Alcohol Poisonings
20.6
TABLE
1. Loading dose: 15 mg/kg IV in 100 mL 0.9% saline over 30 minutes to 1 hour
2. Maintenance dose: 10 mg/kg every 12 hours for four doses, then 15 mg/kg  
every 12 hours
3. Dose adjustments during hemodialysis: 15 mg/kg every 4 hours or 1–1.5 mg/kg 
per hour infusion during dialysis
4. Continue until methanol or ethylene glycol concentrations are <20 mg/dL  
and patient is asymptomatic with normal arterial pH
Modified from Barceloux DG, et al. American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on 
the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1999;37:537; Barceloux DG, et al. 
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on the treatment of methanol  
poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2002;40:415.
Guidelines for Use of Fomepizole in the Treatment  
of Ethylene Glycol and Methanol Poisoning20.7
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   378 09/10/14   1:26 am
379Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
four times daily) and thiamine (100 mg IM four times daily) 
should be considered to increase the metabolism of glyox -
ylate. In addition, judicious intravenous fluids should be 
given to prevent calcium oxalate crystal deposition in the 
kidneys and acute renal failure. Hypocalcemia, the effects 
of which may be worsened by bicarbonate treatment, 
(increasing blood pH will lower the ionized calcium) should 
be corrected if this is symptomatic or severe. It is uncertain 
whether correction of hypocalcemia significantly increases 
calcium oxalate precipitation in tissues.
2. Methanol (MW 32 Da).  Methanol poisoning causes early tem-
porary CNS depression followed by a latent period lasting
6 to 24 hours before the development of metabolic acido-
sis and visual symptoms. The latter , due to formic acid
accumulation, include blurred vision, decreased visual
acuity, photophobia, visual field defects , or even complete 
blindness. Early signs include optic disk hyperemia and
decreased pupillary reflexes to light.
Initial management is similar to that for ethylene 
glycol toxicity, including the correction of acidosis with 
intravenous sodium bicarbonate to pH 7.35 to 7.4. Ethanol 
or fomepizole should be administered to prevent forma-
tion of formic acid according to indications (Table 20.4). 
Hemodialysis should be considered (Table 20.5) when 
there is significant metabolic acidosis (pH < 7.25–7.3), 
abnormalities of vision, deteriorating vital signs, renal fail -
ure, or electrolyte abnormalities unresponsive to conven -
tional therapy. Serum methanol concentration > 50 mg/
dL (15.6 mmol/L) is often used as an indication for hemo-
dialysis. High serum methanol concentrations may require 
several days of treatment with ethanol or fomepizole. If a 
patient with high serum concentrations of methanol is not 
treated with hemodialysis, acid–base status should be mon-
itored closely, and hemodialysis should be initiated as soon 
as acidosis develops. Hemodialysis should be continued 
until acidosis is corrected and serum methanol levels are 
<20 mg/dL (6.3 mmol/L). When methanol concentrations 
are very high, dialysis for 18 to 21 hours may be required. 
In some patients with normal renal function receiving 
ethanol or fomepizole, dialysis may not be necessary once 
serum methanol falls below 50 mg/dL and anion gap aci-
dosis is corrected. Ophthalmologic abnormalities may 
persist transiently or permanently and should not be con -
sidered an indication to continue dialysis. Redistribution 
of methanol may result in elevation of methanol concen-
trations after dialysis ceases, and repeat dialysis may be 
necessary. Consequently, serum osmolality and acid–base 
status should be monitored frequently for the first 24 to 
36 hours after hemodialysis ceases. If dialysis is initiated, 
doses of ethanol or fomepizole should be increased (how-
ever, in the case of ethanol therapy, if ethanol is also used 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   379 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
380
to enrich the dialysate, the systemic doses need not be 
increased) (Tables 20.6 and 20.7). Formic acid is converted 
by 10-formyl tetrahydrofolate synthetase to carbon dioxide 
and water. Folinic acid IV (1 mg/kg [up to 50 mg] in 5% dex-
trose over 30–60 
 minutes every 4 hours) should be given to 
enhance formic acid metabolism until methanol and for -
mate have been cleared. If folinic acid is unavailable, folic 
acid can be used.
3. Isopropanol (MW 60 Da).  Isopropanol (isopropyl alcohol) is
found in rubbing alcohol, antifreeze, and frost remover.
Isopropanol is a common cause of poisoning but is only
occasionally fatal. Isopropanol is oxidized by ALDH to
acetone. Unlike ethylene glycol and methanol, most of the
clinical effects of isopropanol intoxication are due to the
parent compound. Gastrointestinal and CNS symptoms,
including confusion, ataxia, and coma, occur in 1 hour.
Hypotension due to cardiac depression and vasodilata-
tion can occur in severe intoxication. Hypoglycemia can
occur. Acidosis is rare in the absence of severe hypoten-
sion. Therefore, a high serum osmolal gap without aci-
dosis in association with an increased urinary or serum
acetone level is highly suggestive of isopropanol poison-
ing. Supportive treatment is usually all that is necessary.
Inhibition of ALDH is not warranted because acetone is
less toxic than the parent compound. Hemodialysis might
be considered if the isopropanol levels are > 400 mg/dL
(67  mmol/L) and significant CNS suppression, renal fail-
ure, or hypotension exists.
4. Other alcohols.  Poisonings with other alcohols used in a
variety of industrial and household products have been
reported with much less frequency. Metabolism of the par-
ent compound may lead to the generation of toxic metab -
olites. Propylene glycol (MW 76 Da) is an excipient often
used in pharmaceuticals such as lorazepam and nitroglyc-
erine to enhance solubility. Toxicity is associated with lac-
tic acidosis and an elevated osmolal gap. 2-Butoxyethanol
(MW 118 Da) is found in a number of resins, varnishes, and 
glass- and leather-cleaning solutions. Diethylene glycol
(MW 106 Da) produces metabolic acidosis, acute kidney
injury, hypertension, and cardiac arrhythmias; fomepizole
is recommended to prevent metabolism by ALDH. Toxicity 
has been associated with metabolic acidosis, hepatic
injury, and respiratory distress. Hemodialysis is effective
in removing these alcohols and may be indicated in severe
intoxications.
F. Lithium carbonate (MW 7 Da).  Most intoxications result from 
chronic accumulation, renal failure, diuretic use and dehydra-
tion, and interactions with angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs). Mild (serum Li 1.5–2.5 mmol/L) and moderate 
(serum Li 2.5–3.5 mmol/L) lithium toxicity are characterized 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   380 09/10/14   1:26 am
381Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
by neuromuscular irritability, nausea, and diarrhea. Severe 
toxicity (serum Li >3.5 mmol/L) can result in seizures, stupor, 
and permanent neurologic deficit. Initially, diuretics should 
be stopped and prompt rehydration initiated. Sodium polysty-
rene sulfonate may also facilitate Li elimination (Ghannoum, 
2010). As lithium is 0% protein-bound with a V D of 0.8 L/kg, it 
is removed very well by dialysis. Hemodialysis should be con-
sidered when (a) serum Li >3.5 mmol/L, (b) serum Li >2.5 
mmol/L in patients with appreciable symptoms or in patients 
with renal insufficiency, or (c) when serum Li is between 2.5 
and 3.5 mmol/L in asymptomatic patients but when levels are 
expected to rise (e.g., following recent massive ingestion) or 
are not expected to fall below 0.8 mmol/L in the next 36 hours, 
as predicted from a log/linear concentration versus time plot. 
As serum lithium may rebound following dialysis owing to a 
shift from the intracellular compartment, dialysis should be 
performed using a high-clearance dialyzer for 8 to 12 hours. 
Repeated dialysis sessions may be necessary until serum Li 
levels remain below 1.0 mmol/L for 6 to 8 hours after dialy-
sis. Prolonged continuous hemodiafiltration may reduce the 
rebound of lithium levels posttreatment (Leblanc, 1996).
G. Mushroom poisoning.  I ngestion of certain poisonous mush-
rooms is associated initially with severe gastrointestinal 
symptoms followed by hepatic insufficiency and cardiovascu-
lar collapse. The toxins of these mushrooms (α-amanitin and 
phalloidin, MW for both ∼900 Da) are removed by hemodialy-
sis and hemoperfusion in vitro, but the efficacy of hemodialy-
sis or hemoperfusion in patients poisoned by mushrooms has 
been difficult to interpret because of lack of controls; some 
survival benefit has been alleged. Activated charcoal adsorp-
tion of amanitin and administration of silibinin (a flavanoli-
gand from extracts of milk thistle), which prevents amanitin 
uptake by liver cells, may be of use (Goldfrank, 2006). Early 
referral to a poison center and liver transplantation unit is 
recommended. Plasmapheresis is another experimental treat-
ment option.
H. Paraquat (MW 257 Da). D elayed toxicity with pulmonary fibrosis 
and renal and multiorgan failure can occur following inges -
tion of more than 10 mL of paraquat concentrate. Survival is 
dependent on the amount ingested and the plasma levels with 
respect to time of ingestion (Proudfoot, 1979). Plasma levels of 
above 3 mg/L (12 mcmol/L) regardless of when they are mea-
sured are usually fatal. Initial management includes gastric 
lavage with administration of activated charcoal or Fuller’s 
earth with cathartic. Hemoperfusion is effective in drug 
removal and should be considered when the plasma paraquat 
level is 0.1 mg/L (0.4 mcmol/L) or above. Repeated or continu-
ous hemoperfusion may be needed for several days to main-
tain plasma levels below 0.1 mg/L as paraquat has a large V D 
and a slow intercompartmental transfer rate. Although the evi-
dence that hemoperfusion improves survival is controversial, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   381 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
382
the procedure should be considered since occasional patients 
have recovered despite massive ingestion and pulmonary 
involvement. Survival after treatment with plasmapheresis 
has been described (Dearaley, 1978). Recent evidence favors 
the use of salicylates in treatment in order to interrupt NF κB 
activity and provide oxygen scavenging (Dinis-Oliveira, 2009), 
and use of other antioxidants is investigational (Blanco-Ayala, 
2014). Most agree that hemodialysis should be used in the first 
24 hours after poisoning.
I. Phenothiazines and tricyclic antidepressants.  These agents are 
highly protein-bound and have extremely large volumes of dis-
tribution (in the range of 14–21 L/kg). Hence, the total amount 
of these drugs removed by either hemodialysis or hemoperfu-
sion is small. Treatment of intoxication with these agents is 
largely supportive, including bicarbonate therapy for widened 
QRS complex.
J. Anticonvulsants
1. Phenytoin (MW 252 Da). Nystagmus and ataxia occur at serum 
values >20 and 30 mg/mL (79 and 119 mmol/L), respec-
tively. Phenytoin is 90% protein-bound (70% in uremic
patients) and has a V
D of 0.64 L/kg. Surprisingly, despite
phenytoin’s high protein binding, which is not saturable
even in overdose, it is removed moderately well by hemodi-
alysis or hemoperfusion.
2. Sodium valproate (MW 166 Da).  Valproate sodium has a small
VD, is metabolized by the liver, and has significant protein
binding. In overdose, protein binding becomes saturated,
and free valproate can be subjected to extracorporeal
removal. High-flux hemodialysis with or without hemo-
perfusion should be considered when there is coma, severe 
liver dysfunction, or other organ failure.
3. Carbamazepine (MW 236 Da).  Hemoperfusion can be used for
severe intoxications. High-flux hemodialysis also has been
reported to give good results (Koh, 2006).
K. Sedatives and hypnotics. Older agents have greater toxicity and, 
fortunately, are less frequently used today. Since morbidity 
and mortality can be high, extracorporeal methods have been 
employed in overdose with these older drugs. Newer agents 
are associated with lower side effects, and supportive therapy 
is often sufficient to treat overdose.
L. Theophylline (MW 180 Da).  Toxic reactions occur when theoph -
ylline levels exceed 25 mg/L (140 mcmol/L) [therapeutic 
levels being 10–20 mg/L (56–112 mcmol/L)]. Chronic intoxi-
cation may have more pronounced symptoms at a given 
serum level. Seizures typically occur with levels >40 mg/L 
(224 mcmol/L), but may occur at levels as low as 25 mg/L 
(139 mcmol/L). Cardiovascular collapse is rare until levels 
are >50 mg/L (278 mcmol/L). Theophylline has V
D of 0.5 L/
kg, poor intrinsic metabolism, and 56% protein binding, and 
is well adsorbed by charcoal, enabling efficacious removal 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   382 09/10/14   1:26 am
383Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
by MDAC and hemoperfusion. MDAC should be used in sig-
nificant poisonings even with intravenous theophylline over -
dose, although protracted vomiting is often a limiting factor. 
Propranolol (1–3  mg  IV) may be used to treat tachyarrhyth-
mia, and hypokalemia should be corrected. Hemoperfusion 
or high-
 efficiency hemodialysis is indicated if vomiting 
prevents the use of MDAC, or it can be used in addition to 
MDAC in patients with seizures, hypotension, or arrhythmia. 
Hemoperfusion/hemodialysis should also be considered in 
patients with acute intoxication with levels above 100 mg/L 
(556 mcmol/L), in chronic toxicity with levels above 60 mg/L 
(333 mcmol/L), and in both the elderly and infants under 6 
months of age above 40  mg/L (222 mcmol/L). Combining 
hemodialysis with hemoperfusion may further enhance clear-
ance and prevent saturation of the hemoperfusion cartridge. 
Continuous hemoperfusion has also been used with success 
in severely toxic and hypotensive patients. Treatment should 
be continued until the plasma level is 25 to 40 mg/L (140–224 
mcmol/L).
M. Dabigatran etexilate mesylate (Pradaxa) is an oral direct throm-
bin inhibitor for prophylaxis of thromboembolism in patients 
with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Since its US approval in 
2010, dabigatran-associated hemorrhages have been reported, 
and reversal of its activity has been challenging, given that vita-
min K, fresh-frozen plasma, or cryoprecipitate used to reverse 
warfarin-associated coagulopathies are ineffective. Recent 
publications have confirmed that dialysis removes the anti-
coagulant; one in a patient with an intracranial bleed (Chang, 
2013) and the other in a series of dialysis patients administered 
dabigatran at two dose levels and achieving between 49% and 
59% of total dabigatran removal with 4  hours hemodialysis 
(Khadzhynov, 2013). The kinetics seem to follow first-order 
elimination during dialysis (Liesenfeld, 2013). Continuous 
venovenous hemodiafiltration may be useful in severe cases 
(Chiew, 2014).
N. “Bath Salts.”  The active compound is cathinone, a natural 
amphetamine analog from the plant Catha edulis composed 
of a mixture of 3,4 methylenedioxopyrovalerone (MPDV) (MW 
275 Da) and mephedrone (MW 177 Da). The compound pro-
duces sympathetic overactivity, causing cardiac (tachycar -
dia), neurologic (hyperthermia), and psychiatric (agitation) 
derangements after ingestion, similar to the effects of other 
stimulants (cocaine, amphetamine, and 3,4-methylenedioxy-
N-methylamphetamine (MDMA)). These compounds are not 
detected by routine toxicology screens. Acute kidney injury 
can result from exposure to these compounds, likely related to 
rhabdomyolysis and renal arteriolar vasospasm (Adebamiro 
and Perazella, 2012; Regunath, 2012). Multiorgan failure and 
deaths have occurred, but owing to the lack of data about this 
drug, and since most users have coingestions, management 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   383 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
384
similar to that for amphetamines and MDMA intoxications 
is applied, including supportive care with renal replacement 
therapy if indicated (Prosser and Nelson, 2012, Mas-More y, 
2013). Hemodialysis is unlikely to be useful in removing the 
components, assuming they behave similarly, with a short 
half-life, to amphetamines and MDMA.
O. Metformin (MW 129 Da). M etformin is a biguanide used as an oral 
antihyperglycemic agent in the treatment of type II diabetes mel-
litus. It acts by increasing cellular insulin sensitivity. Especially 
in patients with chronic kidney disease, but also in acute over-
dose in patients with normal kidney function, lactic acidosis is 
a rare adverse effect. The condition, which if severe can be fatal, 
is termed metformin-associated lactic acidosis (MALA). 
Metformin is absorbed from the gut relatively rapidly and is not 
metabolized. Ninety percent of the drug is eliminated by glo-
merular filtration and tubular secretion with a serum half-life 
between 1.5 and 5 hours. Surreptitious use of metformin may be 
uncovered in the investigation of lactic acidosis in a normogly-
cemic or hypoglycemic comatose patient. MALA is defined as a 
venous serum lactate level > 5 mmol/L with serum bicarbon-
ate <22 mmol/L. The mainstay of therapy is supportive, includ-
ing bicarbonate administration, hemodialysis for correction of 
acidosis and removal of lactate and metformin. In the study of 
Peters, 2008, mortality was 30%, and especially in those in shock 
and with a high number of comorbidities, suggesting that hypo-
perfusion and not metformin was the cause of the acidosis. The 
dialyzer extraction ratios obtained for metformin (60%) suggest 
that it may be removable by extracorporeal treatments (Nguyen 
and Concepcion, 2011), although its relatively large VD (3 L/kg)  
may limit the effectiveness of extracorporeal treatments. 
Nevertheless, because hemodialysis may rapidly correct the 
associated metabolic acidosis, it is recommended in severe 
metformin poisoning.
P. Thallium. T hallium is a highly toxic metal originally used for 
the treatment of ringworm infestation, and then as a roden -
ticide, but because of toxicity it is now relegated to industrial 
use. It is an agent used in homicide, but exposure can occur 
from contamination of herbal products and drugs of abuse. 
The potentially fatal oral dose is as low as 6 mg/kg. Thallium 
mimics potassium, as these two elements are similar in ionic 
size. Thallium accumulates in nervous tissue, muscle and 
liver, hair, skin, and nails. Thallium inhibits critical metabolic 
enzymes such as pyruvate kinase and succinate dehydroge-
nase. The usual findings of thallium poisoning are alopecia 
and painful ascending peripheral neuropathy, abdominal 
pain, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, autonomic instability, 
and cranial nerve involvement with the most severe poisoning 
exhibiting altered mental status, coma, loss of airway-protec-
tion, respiratory paralysis, and cardiac arrest. (Hoffman, 2003). 
Urine is used (although blood testing is available) as a screen-
ing test with a normal thallium concentration of less than 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   384 09/10/14   1:26 am
385Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
5 mcg/L. Treatment consists of removal from exposure, sup-
portive care, and enhanced elimination ; MDAC and Prussian 
blue enhance elimination via the gastrointestinal tract. Hourly 
thallium removal by hemodialysis and charcoal hemoperfu -
sion appears superior to removal by normal kidney function 
and comparable to stool elimination via Prussian blue. There 
is agreement that modern dialyzers would enhance thallium 
removal compared with older techniques; however, owing to 
its large VD, once distribution of thallium throughout the body 
is complete, even modern techniques are not likely to remove 
a significant proportion of the total body burden. If dialysis 
can be instituted early after ingestion, removal of 1% to 3% of 
total body stores in a 6-hour treatment has been reported, and 
thallium might thus qualify as being slightly dialyzable. It is 
recommended that if thallium exposure is highly suspected on 
the basis of history or clinical features, dialysis be performed 
(Ghannoum, 2012).
Other drugs. Management of poisoning due to other agents 
is beyond the scope of this handbook. The reader is referred to 
Shannon, 2007, and to Tables 20.8 and 20.9.
Antimicrobials/
Anticancer
Cefaclor
Cefadroxil
Cefamandole
Cefazolin
Cefixime
Cefmenoxime
Cefmetazole
(Cefonicid)
(Cefoperazone)
Ceforamide
(Cefotaxime)
Cefotetan
Cefotiam
Cefoxitin
Cefpirome
Cefroxadine
Cefsulodin
Ceftazidime
(Ceftriaxone)
Cefuroxime
Cephacetrile
Cephalexin
Cephalothin
(Cephapirin)
Cephradine
Drugs and Chemicals Removed with Hemodialysis
20.8
TABLE
Moxalactam
Amikacin
Dibekacin
Daptomycin
Fosfomycin
Gentamicin
Kanamycin
Neomycin
Netilmicin
Sisomicin
Streptomycin
Tobramycin
Bacitracin
Colistin
Amoxicillin
Ampicillin
Azlocillin
Carbenicillin
Clavulinic acid
(Cloxacillin)
(Dicloxacillin)
(Floxacillin)
Mecillinam
(Mezlocillin)
(Methicillin)
(Nafcillin)
Penicillin
Piperacillin
Temocillin
Ticarcillin
(Clindamycin)
(Erythromycin)
(Azithromycin)
(Clarithromycin)
Linezolid
Metronidazole
Nitrofurantoin
Ornidazole
Sulfisoxazole
Sulfonamides
Tetracycline
(Doxycycline)
(Minocycline)
Tinidazole
Trimethoprim
Aztreonam
Cilastatin
(Dapsone)
Doripenem
Imipenem
(Chloramphenicol)
(Amphotericin)
Ciprofloxacin
(Enoxacin)
(continued)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   385 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
386
Fluroxacin
(Norfloxacin)
Ofloxacin
Isoniazid
(Vancomycin)
Capreomycin
PAS
Pyrizinamide
(Rifampin)
(Cycloserine)
Ethambutol
5-Fluorocytosine
Acyclovir
(Amantadine)
Didanosine
Foscarnet
Ganciclovir
(Ribavirin)
Vidarabine
Zidovudine
(Pentamidine)
(Praziquantel)
(Fluconazole)
(Itraconazole)
(Ketoconazole)
(Miconazole)
(Chloroquine)
(Quinine)
(Azathioprine)
Bredinin
Busulphan
Cyclophosphamide
5-Fluorouracil
(Methotrexate)
Barbiturates
Amobarbital
Aprobarbital
Barbital
Butabarbital
Cyclobarbital
Pentobarbital
Phenobarbital
Quinalbital
(Secobarbital)
Nonbarbiturate 
Hypnotics, Sedatives, 
Tranquilizers, 
Anticonvulsants
Carbamazepine
Baclofen
Betaxolol
(Bretylium)
Clonidine
(Calcium channel 
blockers)
Captopril
(Diazoxide)
Carbromal
Chloral hydrate
(Chlordiazepoxide)
(Diazepam)
(Diphenylhydantoin)
(Diphenylhydramine)
Ethiamate
Ethchlorvynol
Ethosuximide
Gallamine
Glutethimide
(Heroin)
Meprobamate
(Methaqualone)
Methsuximide
Methyprylon
Paraldehyde
Primidone
Topiramate
Valproic acid
Cardiovascular  
Agents
Acebutolol
(Amiodarone)
Amrinone
Atenolol
(Digoxin)
Enalapril
Fosinopril
Lisinopril
Quinapril
Ramipril
(Encainide)
(Flecainide)
(Lidocaine)
Metoprolol
Methyldopa
Mexiletine
(Ouabain)
N-acetylprocainamide
Nadolol
(Pindolol)
Practolol
Procainamide
Propranolol
(Quinidine)
(Timolol)
Sotatol
Tocainide
Alcohols
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Isopropanol
Methanol
Analgesics, 
Antirheumatics
Acetaminophen
Acetophenetidin
Acetylsalicylic acid
Colchicine
Methylsalicylate
(D-Propoxyphene)
Salicylic acid
Antidepressants
(Amitriptyline)
Amphetamines
(Imipramine)
Isocarboxazid
MAO inhibitors
Moclobemide
(Pargylline)
(Phenelzine)
Tranylcypromine
(Tricyclics)
Solvents, Gases
Acetone
Camphor
Carbon monoxide
(Carbon tetrachloride)
(Eucalyptus oil)
Thiols
Toluene
Trichloroethylene
Plants, Animals, 
Herbicides,  
Insecticides
Alkyl phosphate
Amanitin
Averrhoa carambola/
star fruit/oxalate
Demeton sulfoxide
Dimethoate
Diquat
Endosulfan
Glufosinate
(Roundup/glyphosate)
Methylmercury complex
Drugs and Chemicals Removed with Hemodialysis 
(continued)20.8
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   386 09/10/14   1:26 am
387
Barium
Bromide
(Copper)*
(Iron)*
(Lead)*
Lithium
(Magnesium)
(Mercury)*
Potassium
(Potassium  
dichromate)*
Phosphate
Sodium
Strontium
Thallium
(Tin)
(Zinc)
(Organophosphates)
Paraquat
Snake bite
Sodium chlorate
Potassium chlorate
Trees (hemlock, yew)
Miscellaneous
Acipimox
Allopurinol
Aminophylline
Aniline
Borates
Boric acid
(Chlorpropamide)
Chromic acid
(Cimetidine)
Dinitro-o-cresol
Folic acid
Mannitol
Metformin (drug and 
lactate removal)
Methylprednisolone
4-Methylpyrazole
Sodium citrate
Theophylline
Thiocyanate
Ranitidine
Metals, Inorganics
(Aluminum)* High-flux 
HD with chelation may 
be superior to HP
Arsenic
( ) Implies poor removal.
*Removed with chelating agent.
Drugs and Chemicals Removed with Hemodialysis 
(continued)20.8
TABLE
Drugs and Chemicals Removed with Hemoperfusion
20.9
TABLE
Barbiturates
Amobarbital
Butabarbital
Hexabarbital
Pentobarbital
Phenobarbital
Quinalbital
Secobarbital
Thiopental
Vinalbital
Nonbarbiturate 
Hypnotics, Sedatives, 
and Tranquilizers
Carbamazepine
Carbromal
Chloral hydrate
Chlorpromazine
(Diazepam)
Diphenhydramine
Ethchlorvynol
Glutethimide
Meprobamate
Methaqualone
Methsuximide
Methyprylon
Phenytoin
Promazine
Promethazine
Valproic acid
Analgesics, 
Antirheumatic
Acetaminophen
Acetylsalicylic acid
Colchicine
D-propoxyphyene
Methylsalicylate
Phenylbutazone
Salicylic acid
Antimicrobials/
Anticancer
(Adriamycin)
Ampicillin
Carmustine
Chloramphenicol
Chloroquine
Clindamycin
Dapsone
Doxorubicin
Gentamicin
Ifosfamide
Isoniazid
(Methotrexate)
Pentamidine
Thiabendazole
(5-Fluorouracil)
Vancomycin
Antidepressants
(Amitryptiline)
(Imipramine)
(Tricyclics)
Plant and Animal Toxins, 
Herbicides, Insecticides
Amanitin
Chlordane
Demeton sulfoxide
Dimethoate
Diquat
Endosulfan
Glufosinate
Methylparathion
Nitrostigmine
(Organophosphates)
Phalloidin
Polychlorinated 
biphenyls
Paraquat
Parathion
(continued)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   387 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
388
( ) Implies poor removal.
*Removed with chelating agent.
Drugs and Chemicals Removed with Hemoperfusion 
(continued)20.9
TABLE
References and Suggested Readings
Adebamiro A, Perazella MA. Recurrent acute kidney injury following bath salts intoxi-
cation. Am J Kidney Dis. 2012;59:273–275.
Barceloux DG, et al. American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines 
on the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning. Ad Hoc Committee. J Toxicol Clin 
Toxicol. 1999;37:537.
Barceloux DG, et al. American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on 
the treatment of methanol poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2002;40:415.
Blanco-Ayala T, Andérica-Romero AC, Pedraza-Chaverri J. New insights into antioxi-
dant strategies against paraquat toxicity. Free Radic Res. 2014;48:623–640.
Bronstein AC, et al. 2011 Annual report of the American Association of Poison Control 
Centers’ National Poison Data System (NPDS): 29th Annual Report. Clin Toxicol 
(Phila). 2012;50:911–1164.
Chang DN, Dager WE, Chin AI. Removal of dabigatran by hemodialysis. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2013;61:487–489.
Chiew AL, Khamoudes D, Chan BS. Use of continuous veno-venous haemodiafiltration 
therapy in dabigatran overdose. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2014;52:283–287.
Chow MT, et al. Hemodialysis-induced hypophosphatemia in a normophosphatemic 
patient dialyzed for ethylene glycol poisoning: treatment with phosphorus-
enriched hemodialysis. Artif Organs. 1998;22:905.
Dearaley DP , et al. Plasmapheresis for paraquat poisoning. Lancet. 1978;1:162.
Dinis-Oliveira RJ, et al. An effective antidote for paraquat poisonings: the treatment 
with lysine acetylsalicylate. Toxicology. 2009 31;255:187–193.
Doorenbos CJ, et al. Use of urea containing dialysate to avoid disequilibrium syn-
drome, enabling intensive dialysis treatment of a diabetic patient with renal 
failure and severe glucophage induced lactic acidosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2001; 16:1303.
Done AK, Temple AR. Treatment of salicylate poisoning. Modern Treat. 1971;8:528.
Fleig SV , et al. Digoxin intoxication in acute or chronic kidney failure: elimination 
of digoxin bound to Fab-fragments (Digifab) with high cut-off filter dialysis. 
[Abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;22:317A.
Ghannoum M, et al. Successful treatment of lithium toxicity with sodium polystyrene 
sulfonate: a retrospective cohort study. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2010;48:34–41.
Ghannoum M, et al; Extracorporeal Treatments in Poisoning Workgroup. 
Extracorporeal treatment for thallium poisoning: recommendations from the 
EXTRIP Workgroup. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7:1682–90.
Ghannoum M, et al. Trends in toxic alcohol exposures in the United States from 2000 
to 2013: a focus on the use of antidotes and extracorporeal treatments. Semin Dial. 
2014;27:395–401.
Cardiovascular
Atenolol
Cibenzoline succinate
Clonidine
Digoxin
(Diltiazem)
(Disopyramide)
Flecainide
Metoprolol
N-acetylprocainamide
Procainamide
Quinidine
Miscellaneous
Aminophylline
Cimetidine
(Fluoroacetamide)
(Phencyclidine)
Phenols
(Podophyllin)
Theophylline
Solvents, Gases
Carbon tetrachloride
Ethylene oxide
Trichloroethane
Xylene
Metals
(Aluminum)*
(Iron)*
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   388 09/10/14   1:26 am
389Chapter 20 / Use of Dialysis and Hemoperfusion in the Treatment of Poisoning
Ghannoum M, et al. Hemoperfusion for the treatment of poisoning: technology, 
determinants of poison clearance, and application in clinical practice. Semin Dial. 
2014;27:350–361.
Goldfrank LR. Mushrooms. In: Nelson LS, et al., eds. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies. 
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011:1522.
Hoffman RS. Thallium toxicity and the role of Prussian Blue in therapy. Toxicol Rev . 
2003;22:29–40.
Hussain SA, et al. Phosphate enriched hemodialysis during pregnancy: two case series. 
Hemodial Int. 2005;9:147.
Jacobsen G, et al. Antidotes for methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning. J Toxicol Clin 
Toxicol. 1997;35:127.
Khadzhynov D, et al. Effective elimination of dabigatran by haemodialysis: A phase 
I single-centre study in patients with end-stage renal disease. Thromb Haemost. 
2013;109:596–605.
Koh KH, et al. High-flux haemodialysis treatment as treatment for carbamazepine 
intoxication. Med J Malaysia. 2006;61:109.
Ku Y, et al. Clinical pilot study on high-dose intra-arterial chemotherapy with direct 
hemoperfusion under hepatic venous isolation in patients with advanced hepa -
tocellular carcinoma. Surgery. 1995;117:510.
Kulig K. Initial management of ingestions of toxic substances. N Engl J Med. 
1992;326:1677.
Lavergne V , et al. The EXTRIP (EXtracorporeal TReatments In Poisoning) workgroup: 
guideline methodology. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2012;50:403–413.
Leblanc M, et al. Lithium poisoning treated by high-performance arteriovenous and 
venovenous hemodialfiltration. Am J Kidney Dis. 1996;27:365.
Liesenfeld KH, et al. Pharmacometric characterization of dabigatran hemodialysis. 
Clin Pharmacokinet. 2013;52:453–462.
Martiny S, et al. Treatment of severe digoxin intoxication with digoxin-specific anti-
body fragments: a clinical review. Crit Care Med. 1987;16:629.
Mas-Morey P , et al. Clinical toxicology and management of intoxications with syn-
thetic cathinones (“Bath Salts”). J Pharm Pract. 2013;26:353–357.
Mowry J, et al.  2012 Annual Report of the American Association of Poison Control 
Centers’ National Poison Data System (NPDS): 30th Annual Report. Clin Toxicol. 
2013;51:949–1229.
Nguyen HL, Concepcion L. Metformin intoxication requiring dialysis. Hemodial Int. 
2011;15(suppl 1):S68–71.
Palmer BF. Effectiveness of hemodialysis in the extracorporeal therapy of phenobarbi-
tal overdose. Am J Kidney Dis. 2000;36:640–643.
Proudfoot AT, et al. Paraquat poisoning: significance of plasma paraquat concentra-
tions. Lancet. 1979;2:330.
Peters N, et al. Metformin-associated lactic acidosis in an intensive care unit. Crit Care. 
2008;12:R149.
Prosser JM, Nelson LS. The toxicology of bath salts: a review of synthetic cathinones. 
J Med Toxicol. 2012;8:33–42.
Regunath H, et al. Bath salt intoxication causing acute kidney injury requiring hemo-
dialysis. Hemodial Int. 2012;16:S47–9.
Sam R, et al. Using disodium monohydrogen phosphate to prepare a phosphate-
enriched hemodialysate. Hemodial Int. 2013;17:667–668.
Samtleben W , et al. Plasma exchange and hemoperfusion. In: Jacobs C, et al., eds. 
Replacement of renal function by dialysis. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 
1996:1260.
Shalkham AS, et al. The availability and use of charcoal hemoperfusion in the treat-
ment of poisoned patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2006;48:239–241.
Shannon MW , Borron SW , Burns MJ, eds. Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical 
Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders 
Elsevier; 2007.
Ujhelyi MR, et al. Disposition of digoxin immune Fab in patients with kidney failure. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1993;54:388.
Wadgymar A, et al. Treatment of acute methanol intoxication with hemodialysis. Am 
J Kidney Dis. 1998;31:897.
Wanek MR, et al. Safe use of hemodialysis for dabigatran removal before cardiac sur -
gery. Ann Pharmacother. 2012;46:e21.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   389 09/10/14   1:26 am
Part II / Blood-Based Therapies
390
Yates C, Galvao T, Sowinski KM, et al. Extracorporeal Treatment for Tricyclic 
Antidepressant Poisoning: Recommendations from the EXTRIP Workgroup. 
Semin Dial. 2014;27:381–389.
Yip L, et al. Concepts and controversies in salicylate toxicity. Emerg Med Clin North 
Am. 1994;12:351.
Zdunek M, et al. Plasma exchange for the removal of digoxin-specific antibody frag-
ments in renal failure: timing is important for maximizing clearance. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2000;36:177.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch020.indd   390 09/10/14   1:26 am