Peritoneal dialysis is the method of renal replacement therapy used 
by about 200,000 patients worldwide. Since the introduction of con-
tinuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) almost four decades 
ago and more recently of compact “easy-to-use” hydraulic cyclers for 
automated peritoneal dialysis (APD), the popularity of peritoneal 
dialysis has increased greatly. This is because peritoneal dialysis is 
simple, convenient, and relatively low cost, and because it can be 
done in the home.
 I. WHA T IS PERITONEAL DIALYSIS?  I n essence, peritoneal dialysis 
 involves the transport of solutes and water across a “membrane” 
that separates two fluid-containing compartments: (a) the blood 
in the peritoneal capillaries, which in renal failure contains an 
excess of urea, creatinine, potassium, and other waste products, 
and (b) the dialysis solution in the peritoneal cavity, which typi -
cally contains sodium, chloride, and lactate or bicarbonate and 
which is rendered hyperosmolar by the inclusion of a high con -
centration of glucose. During the course of a peritoneal dialysis 
dwell, three transport processes occur simultaneously: diffusion, 
ultrafiltration, and absorption. The amount of dialysis achieved 
and the extent of fluid removal depend on the volume of dialysis 
solution infused (called the dwell volume), how often this dialy-
sis solution is exchanged, and the concentration of crystalloid 
 osmotic or colloid oncotic agent present.
 II. FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY
A. Anatomy of the peritoneal cavity . T he peritoneum is the serosal 
membrane that lines the peritoneal cavity (Fig. 21.1). It has a 
surface area that is similar to body surface area, and so typi-
cally ranges from 1 to 2 m 2 in an adult. The peritoneum is 
 divided into two portions:
1. The visceral peritoneum, which lines the gut and other 
viscera
2. The parietal peritoneum, which lines the walls of the ab-
dominal cavity
The visceral peritoneum accounts for about 80% of 
the total peritoneal surface area. It receives its blood supply 
Physiology of Peritoneal 
Dialysis
Peter G. Blake and John T. Daugirdas21
392
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   392 11/10/14   2:32 am
Chapter 21 / Physiology of Peritoneal Dialysis 393
from the superior mesenteric artery, and venous drainage is 
via the portal system. The parietal peritoneum, which may 
be more important in peritoneal dialysis, receives blood 
from the lumbar, intercostal, and epigastric arteries and 
drains into the inferior vena cava. Total peritoneal blood 
flow cannot be directly measured, but has been estimated 
to range from 50 to 100 mL/min. The main lymphatic drain-
age of the peritoneum and of the peritoneal cavity is via sto-
mata in the diaphragmatic peritoneum, which ultimately 
drain via large collecting ducts into the right lymphatic 
duct. Additional drainage occurs via lymphatics present in 
both the visceral and the parietal peritoneum.
B. Peritoneal membrane histology. T he peritoneal membrane is lined 
by a monolayer of mesothelial cells equipped with microvil -
lae that produce a thin film of lubricating fluid. Underlying the 
mesothelium is the interstitium, which comprises a gel-like 
matrix containing collagenous and other fibers, the peritoneal 
capillaries, and some lymphatics.
FIGURE 21.1 Simplified anatomy of the peritoneal cavity showing the visceral and 
parietal peritoneal membrane. (Adapted from Khanna R, et al., eds. The Essentials of 
 Peritoneal Dialysis. Dordrecht: Kluwer; 1993.)
Liver
Peritoneal
cavity
Stomach
Pancreas
Duodenum
Colon
Small
intestine
Rectum
Bladder
Peritoneum
Peritoneal cavity
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   393 11/10/14   2:32 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
394
C. Models of peritoneal transport. T here are six regions of resistance 
to moving solute and water across the peritoneum from capil-
lary blood to peritoneal fluid: (a) the stagnant capillary fluid 
film overlying the endothelium of the peritoneal capillaries, 
(b) the capillary endothelium itself, (c) the endothelial base-
ment membrane, (d) the interstitium, (e) the mesothelium, 
and ( f) the stagnant fluid film that overlies the mesothelium.
Of these, the two stagnant fluid films and the mesothelial 
cell are thought to offer only trivial resistance to transport. Two 
concepts of peritoneal transport are popular; they are comple-
mentary and not mutually exclusive, and they emphasize the 
importance of the peritoneal vasculature and the interstitium. 
They are the three-pore model and the distributed model.
1. The three-pore model.  T his model, which has been well vali -
dated by clinical observations, holds that the peritoneal 
capillary is the critical barrier to peritoneal transport and 
that solute and water movement across the peritoneal cap-
illary is dependent on the relative abundance of pores of 
three different sizes (Fig. 21.2).
a. Large pores w ith a radius of 20–40 nm, are thought to be 
large clefts in the endothelium. Macromolecules, such 
as protein are transported by convection through these 
pores.
b. Small pores  w ith a radius of 4–6 nm, likely represent 
smaller clefts between endothelial cells. The density of 
FIGURE 21.2 Diagrammatic representation of the three-pore model of peritoneal 
 transport. (Adapted from Flessner MF. Peritoneal transport physiology: insights from basic 
research. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1991;2:122.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   394 11/10/14   2:32 am
Chapter 21 / Physiology of Peritoneal Dialysis 395
these small pores affects transport of small solutes such 
as urea, creatinine, sodium, and potassium, in associa -
tion with water.
c. Ultrapores with a radius of <0.8 nm, are thought to be
aquaporins in the endothelial cell membrane. The ultra -
pores are responsible for the transport of water only and 
account for “sieving” by the peritoneal membrane (see
what follows).
2. Distributed model and effective peritoneal surface area.  The
 distributed model emphasizes the importance of the distri-
bution of capillaries in the peritoneal membrane and of the 
distance water and solutes have to travel from the capillar-
ies across the interstitium to the mesothelium (Fig. 21.3).
Transport is dependent on the surface area of the perito-
neal capillaries rather than on the total peritoneal surface
area. Furthermore, the distance of each capillary from the
mesothelium determines its relative contribution. The
 cumulative contribution of all of the peritoneal capillaries
determines the effective surface area and the resistance
properties of the membrane. From the distributed model,
FIGURE 21.3 Distributed model concept showing distribution of peritoneal capillaries 
in the interstitium and their distances from the mesothelium, represented by the dotted, 
vertical line. Cp, the solid, curved line, represents the efficiency of transport from a given 
capillary to the peritoneal space, increasing for capillaries located closest to the meso-
thelial boundary. (Adapted from Flessner MF. Peritoneal transport physiology: insights 
from basic research. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1991;2:122.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   395 11/10/14   2:32 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
396
the concept of “effective peritoneal surface area” has arisen. 
This is the area of the peritoneal surface that is sufficiently 
close to the peritoneal capillaries to play a role in transport. 
Therefore, two patients with the same peritoneal surface 
area may have markedly different peritoneal vascularity 
and very different effective peritoneal surface areas. In a 
given patient, effective peritoneal surface area may vary in 
different circumstances, increasing, for example, in perito-
nitis when inflammation increases vascularity. The degree 
of vascularity of the peritoneum is more important than its 
surface area in determining the transport characteristics of 
an individual patient.
 III. PHYSIOLOGY OF PERITONEAL TRANSPORT. P eritoneal transport com -
prises three processes that take place simultaneously: (a) diffu-
sion, (b) ultrafiltration, and (c) fluid absorption.
A. Diffusion. U remic solutes and potassium diffuse from perito-
neal capillary blood into the peritoneal fluid, whereas glucose 
and lactate or bicarbonate present in the dialysate diffuse in 
the opposite direction. Peritoneal diffusion depends on the 
following factors:
1. The concentration gradient. F or a substance such as urea, this is 
maximal at the start of a peritoneal dialysis dwell, when the 
concentration in the dialysis solution is zero. With ongoing 
diffusion during the course of the dwell, this gradient gradu-
ally decreases. The diminishing gradient can be counteracted 
partially by the performance of more frequent exchanges, 
as is typically done in APD, or by increasing dwell volumes, 
which allows the gradient to remain greater for a longer time.
2. Effective peritoneal surface area.  T his can be increased by us-
ing larger fill volumes, which recruit more peritoneal mem-
brane, but this effect is limited in most individuals once 
volumes reach 2.5–3 L.
3. Intrinsic peritoneal membrane resistance.  T his parameter is not 
well characterized but may reflect differences in the num-
ber of pores per unit surface area of capillary available for 
peritoneal transport and the distance between these capil-
laries and the mesothelium.
4. Molecular weight of the solute.  Su bstances with lower mo-
lecular weight, such as urea (MW 60), are more rapidly 
transported by diffusion than those with higher molecular 
weights, such as creatinine (MW 113) or uric acid (MW 168).
5. Mass transfer area coefficient.  T he combined effects of fac-
tors 2–4 are sometimes measured by an index called the 
mass transfer area coefficient (MTAC), which is analogous 
to the  K0A of a hemodialysis membrane. For a given sol-
ute, the MTAC is equivalent to the diffusive clearance of 
that solute per unit time in a theoretical situation in which 
dialysate  flow is infinitely high so that the solute gradi-
ent is always maximal. Typical MTAC values for urea and 
creatinine are 17 and 10 mL/min, respectively. The MTAC 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   396 11/10/14   2:32 am
Chapter 21 / Physiology of Peritoneal Dialysis 397
is mainly a research tool and is not used much in clinical 
practice.
6. Peritoneal blood flow. Diffusion generally does not depend on
peritoneal blood flow, which, at 50–100 mL/min, is already
more than adequate relative to MTAC values for even the
smallest solutes. Instead, in contrast to the situation in hemo-
dialysis, diffusion in peritoneal dialysis is dependent primar-
ily on the dialysate flow rate. Vasoactive agents do influence 
peritoneal transport, but this is not related to their ability to 
increase peritoneal blood flow; rather, it is due to recruit -
ment of larger numbers of peritoneal capillaries, increasing
the effective peritoneal surface area. The same effect is seen 
in peritonitis, where inflammation 
 increases peritoneal vas-
cularity with a consequent increase in diffusion.
B. Ultrafiltration. This occurs as a consequence of the osmotic 
 gradient between the dialysis solution and the peritoneal cap-
illary blood; it is due to the presence of high concentrations of 
glucose (or other osmotic agent) in the 
 dialysis solution and 
depends on the following:
1. Concentration gradient for the osmotic agent (e.g., glucose).  This
typically is maximal at the start of a peritoneal dialysis
dwell, and decreases with time due to dilution of dialysate
glucose by ultrafiltrate from the plasma, and to diffusion of 
glucose from the dialysis solution into the blood (Fig. 21.4). 
The dialysate-to-plasma osmotic gradient will be smaller in 
the presence of marked hyperglycemia. The gradient can be 
FIGURE 21.4 Dialysate glucose level after instillation of a 4.25% dextrose (3.86%  glucose) 
exchange into the peritoneal cavity. The initial level is close to 3,860 mg/dL (214 mM).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   397 11/10/14   2:32 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
398
maximized by using higher dextrose dialysis solutions or by 
doing more frequent exchanges, as is done with APD.
2. Effective peritoneal surface area (as described earlier).
3. Hydraulic conductance of the peritoneal membrane.  T his differs 
between patients and likely reflects the density of small 
pores and ultrapores in the peritoneal capillaries, as well as 
the distribution of capillaries in the interstitium.
4. Reflection coefficient for the osmotic agent (e.g., glucose).  This 
measures how effectively the osmotic agent diffuses out of 
the dialysis solution into the peritoneal capillaries. The re-
flection coefficient is between 0 and 1; the lower the value, 
the faster the osmotic gradient is lost and the less sustained 
ultrafiltration is. For glucose, the reflection coefficient is 
remarkably low (approximately 0.03), indicating how im-
perfect an osmotic agent glucose is. The polyglucose prepa-
ration, icodextrin, has a reflection coefficient close to 1.0.
5. Hydrostatic pressure gradient.  N ormally, the peritoneal capil -
lary pressure (around 20 mm Hg) is higher than the intra-
peritoneal pressure (around 7 mm Hg), which should favor 
fluid removal by ultrafiltration. This gradient will be greater 
in a volume-expanded patient and less in a volume-depleted 
patient. Rises in intraperitoneal pressure will decrease ul -
trafiltration, and this may be seen when larger dwell vol-
umes are used or when the patient is seated or standing.
6. Oncotic pressure gradient. O ncotic pressure acts to keep fluid 
in the blood, and so opposes ultrafiltration. In hypoalbu-
minemic patients, oncotic pressure is low and ultrafiltra -
tion may be greater than usual.
7. Sieving. S ieving occurs when solute moves along with wa-
ter across a semipermeable membrane by convection, but 
some of the solute is held back or “sieved. ” Sieving there-
fore renders ultrafiltration a less effective form of solute 
removal, although water removal may occur unhindered. 
Sieving coefficients for various solutes differ and depend 
on molecular weight and charge. Sieving coefficients for 
the same solute can differ between patients, depending on 
patient-specific peritoneal membrane characteristics (e.g., 
ultrapore density in capillary endothelial cells). About half 
of total ultrafiltration occurs through ultrapores, and this 
transports solute-free water. The remaining half of ultrafil-
tration occurs through small endothelial pores, which are 
clefts between endothelial cells, and here sieving is likely 
absent, and the solute concentrate of this portion of the ul-
trafiltrate is similar to that in plasma (La Milia, 2005).
8. Alternative osmotic agents (icodextrin). Icodextrin is a large mol-
ecule and an oncotic agent with a high reflection coefficient. 
Ultrafiltration using icodextrin is sustained at a  relatively 
constant level throughout even a long-duration dwell.
C. Fluid absorption. Fluid absorption from the peritoneal space oc -
curs via lymphatics at a relatively constant rate. There is little 
or no sieving. Fluid absorption via lymphatics reduces the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   398 11/10/14   2:32 am
Chapter 21 / Physiology of Peritoneal Dialysis 399
efficiency of both solute and fluid removal by peritoneal dialy-
sis. Only a small proportion of fluid absorption occurs directly 
into the subdiaphragmatic lymphatics. Fluid is also absorbed 
via the parietal peritoneum into the tissues of the abdominal 
wall, from where it is subsequently taken up by local lymphatics 
and perhaps by peritoneal capillaries. Typical rates of peritoneal 
fluid absorption are 1.0–2.0 mL/min. The factors that affect the 
rate of fluid absorption of a peritoneal dwell are as follows:
1. Intraperitoneal hydrostatic pressure.  High pressures will in-
crease the amount of fluid absorbed. High intraperitoneal 
hydrostatic pressure can result from increased intraperito-
neal volume owing to effective ultrafiltration, or to use of 
a large infusion volume. Intraperitoneal pressure is higher 
when sitting than when standing, and it is lowest when 
 supine (Fig. 21.5).
FIGURE 21.5 Intra-abdominal pressure after infusing various volumes of dialysis solu-
tion. (Modified from Diaz-Buxo JA. Continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis. In: Nolph KD, 
ed. Peritoneal Dialysis. Hingham, MA: Martinus Nijhoff; 1985.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   399 11/10/14   2:32 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
400
2. Effectiveness of lymphatics. The effectiveness of lymphatics in
absorbing fluid from the peritoneal cavity can differ mark -
edly from person to person for reasons that are not well
understood.
I V. CLINICAL ASSESSMENT AND IMPLICATIONS OF PERITONEAL TRANSPORT
A. Peritoneal equilibration test (PET). In clinical practice, indices such 
as the MTAC and hydraulic conductance of the peritoneal 
membrane are too complex for routine measurement. Perito -
neal transport is assessed using equilibration ratios between 
dialysate and plasma for urea (D/P urea), creatinine (D/P Cr), 
and sodium (D/P Na) (Fig. 21.6). Equilibration ratios measure 
the combined effect of diffusion and ultrafiltration rather than 
either in isolation. However, they correlate well with MTAC 
values for the corresponding solutes. They are influenced by 
the molecular weight of the solute concerned as well as by 
the patient’s peritoneal membrane permeability and effective 
surface area. Body size tends to have little relation to equili-
bration ratios despite its supposed equivalence to peritoneal 
surface area, suggesting that actual and effective peritoneal 
surface areas correlate poorly.
Conventionally, equilibration ratios are measured 
using a standardized PET that involves instillation of a 2.5% 
FIGURE 21.6 Rate of entry of urea, creatinine, and vitamin B12 into peritoneal dialysis 
 solution that has been left in the abdomen. Results are expressed as the ratio of the level 
in dialysate (D) to the level in plasma (P). Typical D/P ratios for urea at time points of 
40 min, 2 hr, and 4 hr are indicated.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   400 11/10/14   2:32 am
Chapter 21 / Physiology of Peritoneal Dialysis 401
2-L   d extrose dwell with dialysate samples taken at 0, 2, and 
4 hours and a plasma sample at 2 hours. The PET is also used 
to measure net fluid removal (volume drained at 4 hours vs. 
volume instilled) and the ratio of dialysate glucose at 4 hours 
to dialysate glucose at time zero (D/D 0 G). Patients are classi-
fied principally on the basis of their 4-hour D/P Cr into one of 
four “transporter” categories: high, high-average, low-average, 
and low transporters (Fig. 21.7). Use of PET results to optimize 
a peritoneal dialysis prescription is described in Chapter 25.
1. High transporters  a chieve the most rapid and complete 
equilibration for creatinine and urea, because they have 
FIGURE 21.7 Standard peritoneal equilibration curves for urea, creatinine, and sodium, 
as well as glucose absorption showing ranges of values for high, high-average, low-
average, and low transporters. (Modified from Twardowski et al. Peritoneal equilibration 
test. Perit Dial Bull. 1987;7:138.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   401 11/10/14   2:32 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
402
a relatively large effective peritoneal surface area and/
or high intrinsic membrane permeability. However, high 
transporters rapidly lose their osmotic gradient for ultra-
filtration because the dialysate glucose diffuses into the 
blood through the highly permeable membrane. Thus, high 
transporters have the highest D/P Cr, D/P Ur, and D/P Na 
values but have low net ultrafiltration and D/D
0 G values. 
They also have higher dialysate protein losses and so tend 
to have lower serum albumin values.
2. Low transporters , in contrast, have slower and less com-
plete equilibration for urea and creatinine, reflecting low
membrane permeability and/or small effective peritoneal
surface area. They thus have low D/P Ur, D/P Cr, and D/P
Na and high D/D
0 G with good net ultrafiltration. Dialysate
protein losses are lower, and serum albumin values tend to 
be higher.
3. High-average and low-average transporters  have intermediate
values for these ratios and for ultrafiltration and protein
losses.
4. Clinical implications of transporter type. High transporters tend 
to dialyze relatively well but to ultrafiltrate poorly, whereas 
low transporters ultrafiltrate well but dialyze poorly, al -
though these issues are often masked while residual renal
function is still substantial. Theoretically, high transport -
ers do best on peritoneal dialysis regimens that involve
frequent short-duration dwells (e.g., APD) so that ultrafil-
tration is maximized. Conversely, low transporters should
do best on regimens based on long-duration, high-volume
dwells so that diffusion is maximized. In practice, in most
units, patient lifestyle and other nonmedical issues influ -
ence the peritoneal prescription more than transport sta -
tus, and low transporters can be well managed on APD,
while high transporters can do CAPD provided the long
nocturnal dwell is managed appropriately.
B. Net fluid removal. Net fluid removal depends on the balance be-
tween peritoneal ultrafiltration and peritoneal fluid absorp -
tion. In a given patient, lymphatic flow rate and the transport 
qualities of the membrane are subject to change. In clinical 
practice, fluid removal in peritoneal dialysis can be enhanced 
by the following:
1. Maximizing the osmotic gradient
a. Higher tonicity dwells (e.g., 4.25% dextrose)
b. Shorter duration dwells (e.g., APD)
c. Higher dwell volumes
2. An osmotic agent with a higher reflection coefficient
(e.g., icodextrin)
3. Increasing urine output (e.g., with diuretics)
As is shown in Figure 21.8, the net fluid removal with a 
1.5% 2-L dextrose dwell is maximal in the first hour, and in-
traperitoneal volume is greatest after 90 minutes. After this 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   402 11/10/14   2:32 am
Chapter 21 / Physiology of Peritoneal Dialysis 403
time, the volume being ultrafiltered is less than that being 
resorbed, and by 6–10 hours, the intraperitoneal volume 
falls below 2 L, and the patient is achieving net fluid gain. 
If the more hypertonic 4.25% dextrose dialysis solution is 
used, initial fluid removal is greater and more sustained, 
and intraperitoneal volume is greatest after about 3 hours 
and will not fall below 2 L until after many hours.
The effect of larger dwell volumes on net fluid removal 
is complex. On the one hand, fluid removal increases be-
cause the osmotic gradient persists longer due to the greater 
quantity of glucose in the peritoneal cavity and because 
the effective surface area over which water is transported 
is likely increased. On the other hand, fluid removal may 
decrease because intraperitoneal pressure rises (Fig. 21.5), 
 decreasing the hydrostatic gradient that favors ultrafiltra -
tion and promoting peritoneal fluid absorption into the 
 tissues and lymphatics. The net effect of these forces varies 
from patient to patient and is difficult to predict.
C. Peritoneal clearance.  C learance for a given solute is defined 
as the volume of plasma cleared of that solute per unit time. 
Clearance in peritoneal dialysis is the net result of the effects 
of solute removal by diffusion plus ultrafiltration minus sol -
ute gain via fluid absorption. Clearance is usually calculated 
FIGURE 21.8 Ultrafiltration volume (volume drained minus volume instilled) as a func-
tion of time after infusion of dialysis solution containing 1.5% dextrose (1.35% glucose, 
open circles) or 4.25% dextrose (3.86% glucose, closed circles). (Modified from Diaz-Buxo 
JA. Intermittent, continuous ambulatory and continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis. In: 
 Nissenson AR, et al., eds. Clinical Dialysis. Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1984.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   403 11/10/14   2:32 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
404
as quantity of solute removed over a given period divided by 
the average plasma concentration of that solute during the re-
moval period. Clearance is maximal at the start of the dwell, 
when both diffusion and ultrafiltration are greatest, but be-
comes less as both urea concentration and glucose osmotic 
gradients diminish as the dwell proceeds. However, because 
peritoneal clearance is measured per day or per week rather 
than per minute or per hour, average values of clearance are 
calculated by the usual measures of adequacy.
Peritoneal clearance can be increased by (a) maximizing 
time on peritoneal dialysis (i.e., no “dry time”), (b) maximiz-
ing concentration gradient (i.e., more frequent exchanges as in 
APD and larger dwell volumes), (c) maximizing effective perito-
neal surface area (i.e., larger dwell volumes), and (d) maximiz-
ing peritoneal fluid removal (as described earlier).
The mechanism by which increasing dwell volumes aug-
ment clearance is sometimes confusing. Larger dwell volumes 
enhance urea and creatinine diffusion from blood to dialysate 
because the greater volume makes the solute concentration 
gradient stay higher for longer. Also, effective peritoneal surface 
area may increase because of recruitment of more membrane 
by the greater fluid volume, and consequently MTAC values 
may rise. This effect tends to be modest or absent once volumes 
exceed 2.5 L in adults, presumably because all of the available 
membrane has been recruited. These two effects increase dif -
fusive clearance even though D/P ratios tend to be a little lower 
when larger dwell volumes are used. Another aspect of larger 
dwell volumes that tends to decrease clearance is the effect to 
diminish ultrafiltration slightly, which lowers the amount of 
solute removed by convective transport. These last two factors 
conspire to limit the increase in clearance with higher dwell 
volumes. For example, a switch from 2.0- to 2.5-L dwells repre-
sents a 25% increase in infused volume but might, for example, 
be associated with a decrease in D/P ratios by 3% and of ultra-
filtration by 5%, limiting the increase in clearance to about 20%.
Urea versus creatinine: Changes in the peritoneal di -
alysis prescription alter urea and creatinine clearances to 
different degrees because the latter is more time-dependent. 
Thus, a switch from CAPD to APD without a day dwell may 
lead to a much more marked decrease in creatinine than in 
urea clearance, whereas the introduction of a long day dwell 
in APD will cause a disproportionately greater enhancement 
in creatinine clearance. These effects are especially marked in 
low transporters, in whom creatinine clearance is particularly 
time-dependent, as reflected by the flat shape of the creatinine 
equilibration curve.
1. Measurement of clearance.  Peritoneal clearance per day in
peritoneal dialysis is easily measured and corresponds to
the total daily dialysate drain volume multiplied by the sol-
ute concentration in that dialysate and divided by the si-
multaneously obtained plasma concentration of the same
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   404 11/10/14   2:32 am
Chapter 21 / Physiology of Peritoneal Dialysis 405
solute. Stated more simply, clearance equals the drain vol -
ume multiplied by the D/P ratio for the solute concerned.
In CAPD, the plasma urea level does not change sig-
nificantly during the day because dialysis is continuous. 
Thus, the plasma sample can be taken at any convenient 
time during the day that dialysate is collected for analy-
sis. In APD, there is significantly more intense dialysis at 
night than in the daytime; therefore, a constant plasma 
urea cannot be assumed, though variation is modest. Ide-
ally, the plasma sample should be taken in the middle of the 
noncycling period (usually mid-afternoon) when the urea 
is about halfway between its lowest level (in the morning 
after cycling) and its highest level (at night before cycling).
Clearance is measured per day but expressed per week. 
It is conventional to normalize urea clearance to total-body 
water (V), which is typically estimated using the Watson or 
Morgenstern equations (see Chapter 25 and Appendix B). 
Creatinine clearance is normalized to 1.73 m
2 surface area, 
which is estimated using the formula of DuBois or Gehan 
and George (See Chapter 25 and Appendix B).
2. Examples of peritoneal clearance calculations. See Chapter 25.
D. Sodium removal. In peritoneal dialysis, it is helpful to consider 
sodium removal separately from water removal. As already 
mentioned, ultrafiltration in peritoneal dialysis involves so -
dium sieving so that water losses are proportionately greater 
than sodium losses. At the end of a 4-hour dwell using 132 mM 
sodium dialysis solution, the sodium level in the drained di-
alysate typically will have fallen to about 128 mM (Fig. 21.7). 
In the early part of a dwell, dialysate sodium falls to an even 
greater extent, because it is being diluted by ultrafiltrate con-
taining only about 65 mM sodium. This hyponatric effect of 
ultrafiltration is partly counteracted by diffusion of sodium 
from body tissues to dialysate. Thus, late in the dwell, when 
ultrafiltration has slowed, diffusion will have increased the di-
alysate sodium back up to about 128 mM. Overall, net sodium 
removal with a 4-hour, 1.5% dextrose, 2-L exchange is mini-
mal, although with a 4-hour, 4.25% dextrose, 2-L dwell, sodium 
removal typically is in excess of 70 mmol. An alternative way 
of increasing sodium removal is to use dialysis solutions with a 
lower sodium concentration. With such low sodium solutions, 
diffusive sodium removal is increased, but greater concentra-
tions of glucose are required to achieve the same osmotic ef-
fect. Such lower sodium dialysis solutions can be prepared but 
are not commercially available.
E. Protein losses. Obligatory dialysate protein losses are a feature of 
peritoneal dialysis and typically average 5–10 g daily. Half of the 
protein lost is albumin. These losses are probably the major cause 
of the slightly lower serum albumin levels typically seen in perito-
neal dialysis patients compared with hemodialysis patients. Al-
bumin losses are greatest, and serum albumin is lowest, in high 
transporters. The losses or clearances of large-molecular-weight 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   405 11/10/14   2:32 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
406
proteins such as albumin are relatively constant during the 
course of a dwell. Low-molecular-weight proteins (such as lyso-
zyme) are lost as well, and their clearance behaves more like that 
of creatinine, being highest during the initial part of a dwell, and 
then falling off markedly as the dwell proceeds.
Protein losses are believed to occur via a relatively small 
number of large pores that correspond to interendothelial 
clefts. Peritoneal absorption of fluid is a form of “bulk flow” 
and so involves protein as well as other solutes. It thus acts to 
decrease net peritoneal protein losses.
During peritonitis, protein losses increase markedly for 
a number of days, presumably due to an increase in effective 
peritoneal surface area due to increased peritoneal vascular -
ity. This effect is, in part, mediated by prostaglandins. Protein 
losses on intermittent peritoneal dialysis regimens appear to 
be somewhat less per day than on continuous regimens, pre-
sumably because protein losses are decreased during the “dry” 
interdialytic periods.
There is a school of thought that protein losses during 
peritoneal dialysis are not completely a bad thing, but rather, 
that with the lost protein and albumin the body effectively 
excretes tightly protein-bound toxins that are difficult to re-
move by other means. The extent of this “benefit” of perito-
neal dialysis remains to be clarified. Attempts to replicate loss 
of  protein-bound uremic toxins by performing hemodialysis 
using very permeable, protein-losing membranes have not 
shown a clear-cut clinical benefit.
 V. RESIDUAL RENAL FUNCTION.  T here is evidence that residual renal 
function persists longer and at a higher level in chronic peritoneal 
dialysis patients than in those on hemodialysis. Residual function 
contributes to salt and water removal and to clearance of both 
small- and medium-size molecular-weight solutes.  Creatinine 
clearance is disproportionately high with residual renal function, 
as tubular secretion contributes to the overall clearance to a rela-
tively large extent. The opposite is the case with urea clearance, 
where tubular resorption of urea acts to reduce urea excretion. 
There is evidence that the average of urea and creatinine clear -
ance is a reasonable estimate of true glomerular filtration rate 
in the failing kidney, and this estimate is used when calculating 
the renal contribution to total creatinine clearance in patients on 
peritoneal dialysis. Residual renal function has been shown to be 
predictive of patient outcome in peritoneal dialysis, perhaps be -
cause it is associated with better preserved renal endocrine and 
metabolic function and superior volume homeostasis, as well as 
greater small- and large-molecule clearance.
References and Suggested Readings
Cnossen TT, et al. Quantification of free water transport during the peritoneal 
 equilibration test. Perit Dial Int. 2009;29:523–527.
Devuyst O, Rippe B. Water transport across the peritoneal membrane. Kidney Int. 
2014;85:750–758.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   406 11/10/14   2:32 am
Chapter 21 / Physiology of Peritoneal Dialysis 407
Durand PY. Measurement of intraperitoneal pressure in peritoneal dialysis patients. 
Perit Dial Int. 2005;25:333–337.
Flessner M. Water-only pores and peritoneal dialysis. Kidney Int. 2006;69:1494–1495.
Flessner MF. The role of extracellular matrix in transperitoneal transport of water and 
solutes. Perit Dial Int. 2001;21(suppl 3):S24–S29.
Heimburger O. Peritoneal transport with icodextrin solution. Contrib Nephrol . 
2006;150:97–103.
Heimburger O, et al. A quantitative description of solute and fluid transport during 
peritoneal dialysis. Kidney Int. 1992;41:1320–1332.
Krediet RT, Struijk DG. Peritoneal dialysis membrane evaluation in clinical practice. 
Contrib Nephrol. 2012;178:232–237.
La Milia V , et al. Mini-peritoneal equilibration test: a simple and fast method to assess 
free water and small solute transport across the peritoneal membrane. Kidney Int. 
2005;68:840–846.
La Milia V , et al. Functional assessment of the peritoneal membrane. J Nephrol. 
2013;26(suppl 21):120–139.
Ni J, et al. Aquaporin-1 plays an essential role in water permeability and ultrafiltration 
during peritoneal dialysis. Kidney Int. 2006;69:1518–1525.
Rippe B, et al. Fluid and electrolyte transport across the peritoneal membrane during 
CAPD according to the three-pore model. Perit Dial Int. 2004;24:10–27.
Stachowska-Pietka J, et al. Computer simulations of osmotic ultrafiltration and small 
solute transport in peritoneal dialysis: a spatially distributed approach. Am J 
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012;302:F1331–F1341.
Twardowski ZJ, et al. Peritoneal equilibration test. Perit Dial Bull. 1987;7:138.
Waniewski A, et al. Distributed modeling of osmotically driven fluid transport in peri-
toneal dialysis: theoretical and computational investigations. Am J Physiol Renal 
Physiol. 2009;296:1960–1968.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch021.indd   407 11/10/14   2:32 am