408
In this chapter, solutions and equipment for the various forms of 
chronic peritoneal dialysis (PD) are described. Apparatus for acute 
PD is reviewed in Chapter 24.
 I. CONTINUOUS AMBULATORY PERITONEAL DIALYSIS (CAPD). I n CAPD, di-
alysis solution is constantly present in the abdomen. The solution 
is typically changed four times daily, with a range of three to five 
times, depending on individual patient requirements. Drainage of 
“spent” dialysate and inflow of fresh dialysis solution are performed 
manually, using gravity to move fluid into and out of the peritoneal 
cavity. Technically, PD solution flows into the peritoneal cavity, and 
dialysate drains out (i.e., the solution does not become dialysate un-
til  dialysis has occurred, although the term “dialysate” is commonly 
used for fresh as well as for used or “spent” solution). In this chapter, 
the term dialysate is used correctly to refer only to PD solution after 
it has been instilled into the peritoneal space.
A. Dialysis solutions.  C APD solutions are packaged in clear, flex -
ible plastic bags, typically made from polyvinyl chloride. Some 
newer PD solutions are packaged with the different solution 
components in two-chamber (or three-chamber) bags, which 
are mixed before infusion into the peritoneal cavity.
1. Dialysis solution volumes. F or adult patients, CAPD solutions 
are available in volumes of 1.5, 2.0, 2.25, 2.5, or 3.0 L, de-
pending on the manufacturer. The commonly used bags are 
routinely overfilled by about 100 mL to allow for flushing, 
as will be described in a subsequent section. The standard 
volume prescribed has been 2.0 L, but 2.5 L is also widely 
used. Generally, larger volumes are prescribed in order to 
increase solute clearance, but they may not always be tol-
erated by patients because of symptoms due to the conse-
quent increase in intraperitoneal hydrostatic pressure.
2. Dialysis solution glucose, pH, and glucose degradation products 
(GDPs). Dextrose (glucose) is the osmotic agent commonly 
used in CAPD solutions, and preparations containing 
1.5%, 2.5%, and 4.25% dextrose (as glucose monohydrate, 
MW 198) are routinely available and are labeled as such in 
North America. The true anhydrous dextrose or glucose 
Apparatus for Peritoneal 
Dialysis
Olof Heimbürger and Peter G. Blake22
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   408 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 22 / Apparatus for Peritoneal Dialysis 409
concentrations (MW 180) in these solutions are 1.36%, 
2.27%, and 3.86%, respectively, and this is how they are typi-
cally labeled in Europe. The approximate osmolarities of 
these solutions are 345, 395, and 484 mOsm/L, respectively.
The heat sterilization of glucose leads to generation of 
glucose degradation products (GDPs), which may have toxic 
effects both on the peritoneal membrane and systemically. 
Less GDPs are generated when glucose is heat sterilized at low 
pH, so in order to minimize GDP generation, the pH of stan-
dard lactate-based PD solutions is kept at about 5.5 during 
heat sterilization. Lowering pH further would decrease GDPs 
even more, but would also cause infusion pain in patients. A 
pH of 5.5 on infusion is normally well tolerated, and solution 
pH rises rapidly as bicarbonate diffuses into the peritoneal 
cavity from the plasma. However, some patients complain of 
pain during inflow. This pain can be relieved by neutralizing 
the dialysis solution pH with alkali prior to instillation.
The low pH of PD solution may have adverse ef-
fects on leukocytes, impairing their ability for phagocy-
tosis and bacterial killing and may even be harmful to 
the peritoneal membrane. Therefore, another strategy to 
reduce GDP generation has been introduced. This is the 
use of two-  compartment solution bags (Fig. 22.1). In one 
FIGURE 22.1 Two-compartment PD solution bag to allow delivery of a normal pH   
solution with low GDPs with or without bicarbonate buffer.
Dextrose (glucose monohydrate)
Calcium chloride
Magnesium chloride
pH 3.2   
Sodium bicarbonate
Sodium lactate
Sodium chloride
pH 8.0
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   409 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
410
compartment, the glucose is heat sterilized at a very low 
pH (about 3.2), under which conditions the formation of 
GDPs is reduced even further. In the other compartment, 
the rest of the solution is maintained at an alkaline pH dur-
ing sterilization. At the time of use, the two compartments 
are allowed to mix, bringing the pH of the resultant com-
bined solution to normal. The end result, therefore, is a low 
GDP , normal pH PD solution.
3. Dialysis solution buffer and pH.  Most commonly marketed PD 
solutions contain lactate as the bicarbonate-generating 
base, usually in a 40-mM, or occasionally a 35-mM, con-
centration. The lactate diffuses across the peritoneal mem-
brane into the bloodstream and is soon metabolized into 
bicarbonate. A more direct way to supply bicarbonate is to 
add it directly to the dialysis solution. However, solutions 
containing bicarbonate and no CO 2 have a high pH, at 
which calcium and magnesium precipitate. For this reason, 
it is not possible to store bicarbonate-buffered solution in 
a single-bag system. A variation of the two-compartment-
bag system described earlier to limit generation of GDP can 
be used to enable inclusion of bicarbonate in PD solution. 
A solution containing calcium and magnesium, a small 
amount of acid, and other electrolytes is  put into one of 
the compartments, and bicarbonate-containing solution is 
kept in another compartment. At the time of use, the solu-
tions in the two compartments are mixed together, and the 
small amount of acid in the calcium/magnesium solution 
reacts with bicarbonate to generate carbonic acid and CO2, 
which keeps the pH of the final solution in the physiologic 
range, at which calcium and magnesium remain in solu-
tion. The process is very similar to providing bicarbonate 
dialysis solution for hemodialysis from a two-component 
set of concentrates.
Thus, there are at least three commercially available 
two-bag systems for PD solutions. The Balance solution 
from Fresenius uses only lactate as the base. The two-bag 
system is used to limit the formation of GDP by sterilizing 
the glucose-containing component at low pH. Physioneal, 
from Baxter, contains both bicarbonate and lactate, and 
the two-bag system is used both to limit generation of GDP 
during sterilization and to allow bicarbonate to be used. 
Bicavera, from Fresenius, contains only bicarbonate and 
no lactate, and here again, the two-bag system allows use 
of bicarbonate and also greatly reduced generation of GDP 
(Table 22.1).
Because these two-bag system solutions are at physio-
logic or near-physiologic pH after mixing, and because they 
contain greatly reduced amounts of GDPs, they are theo-
retically more biocompatible than standard one-bag solu-
tions where the pH is about 5.5. The hope was that these 
biocompatible solutions would lead to better long-term 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   410 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 22 / Apparatus for Peritoneal Dialysis 411
preservation of peritoneal transport function, including 
ultrafiltration. It was also hoped that they would enhance 
peritoneal host defenses and thereby decrease peritonitis 
rates, and that their use would result in lower serum GDP 
levels and ultimately better preservation of residual renal 
function, and that all this would translate into improved 
technique and patient survival on PD.
There is evidence that each of these dual-bag solu-
tions is effective in dealing with infusion pain. However, 
this complication occurs only in fewer than 5% of patients 
using standard low pH PD solutions. With regard to other 
more important outcomes, results from randomized con -
trolled trials have shown inconsistent results. The recent 
balANZ study showed a significantly lower peritonitis rate 
with the Balance solution, but this has not been confirmed 
in other trials, and a meta-analysis has been negative 
(Johnson, 2012; Cho, 2014). Some trials have shown bet -
ter preservation of residual renal function but have also 
shown less effective ultrafiltration, leading to concern that 
the improved preservation of renal function with this new 
solution is simply a consequence of hypervolemia (Davies, 
2013). Randomized studies have not been large enough to 
allow conclusions about long-term patient or technique 
survival. These biocompatible solutions are widely used in 
Europe and in parts of Asia but very little in North 
 America 
and elsewhere, partly because of the lack of consistent 
high-level evidence supporting their use and partly be-
cause of their higher cost.
4. Dialysis solution electrolyte concentrations. The electrolyte con-
centrations of CAPD solutions vary little by manufacturer.
The standard formulations from the three large interna -
tional manufacturers are shown in Table 22.1. They contain 
no potassium, and sodium levels are mostly 
 132–134 mM. 
Higher sodium concentrations would lead to less diffusive
removal of sodium during dwells. Lower sodium solutions
have been proposed as a means of augmenting sodium re-
moval, but would require more 
 glucose to maintain a given 
osmolarity.
With the widespread use of calcium carbonate or cal-
cium acetate as phosphate binders, PD solutions contain-
ing 2.0–2.5 mEq/L (1.0–1.25 mM) rather than 3.5  mEq/L 
(1.75 mM) calcium are increasingly used with the goal 
of reducing the incidence of the hypercalcemia that is 
sometimes associated with oral calcium and vitamin D 
administration. This also protects against adynamic bone 
disease, which was previously common in PD patients. 
However, lower calcium PD solutions have been associated 
with higher plasma parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels. 
PD solutions typically contain magnesium levels of 1.0 or 
0.5 mEq/L (0.5 or 0.25 mM), and this can occasionally result 
in 
 magnesium depletion.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   411 09/10/14   1:28 am
Commonly Available Peritoneal Dialysis Solution Formulations
22.1
TABLE
Manufacturer pH
Osmotic 
Agent Na (mM) Ca (mM) Mg (mM) Lactate (mM)
Bicarbonate 
(mM) Pouches
Dianeal
PD1
Baxter 5.5 Glucose 132 1.75 0.75 35 0 1
Dianeal
PD4
Baxter 5.5 Glucose 132 1.25 0.25 40 0 1
Stay safe
2/4/3
FMC 5.5 Glucose 134 1.75 0.5 35 0 1
Stay safe
17/19/18
FMC 5.5 Glucose 134 1.25 0.5 35 0 1
Nutrineal Baxter 6.5 Amino acids 132 1.25 0.25 40 0 1
Extraneal Baxter 5.5 Icodextrin 132 1.75 0.25 40 0 1
Physioneal 35 Baxter 7.4 Glucose 132 1.75 0.25 10 25 2
Physioneal 40 Baxter 7.4 Glucose 132 1.25 0.25 15 25 2
Balance FMC 7.4 Glucose 134 1.25
1.75
0.5 35 2.5 2
Bicavera FMC 7.4 Glucose 134 1.25
1.75
0.5 0 34 2
These may differ slightly in name and in formulation from region to region.
All glucose-based solutions are available in three strengths (1.36, 2.27, and 3.86 mg/dL of glucose, equivalent to 1.5, 2.5, and 4.25 mg/dL of dextrose as glucose monohydrate.
To convert calcium from mmol/L (mM) to mg/dL multiply by 4.
To convert magnesium from mmol/L (mM) to mg/dL multiply by 2.43.
FMC, Fresenius Medical Care.
412
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   412 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 22 / Apparatus for Peritoneal Dialysis 413
5. Non-glucose solutions.  Gl ucose  as an osmotic agent in PD 
has the advantage of being familiar, relatively safe, and in-
expensive, and also is a source of calories. There is concern, 
however, that instillation of large amounts of glucose into 
the peritoneal cavity predisposes patients to hyperglyce -
mia, dyslipidemia, obesity, and to long-term peritoneal 
membrane damage, both directly and via GDPs and the for-
mation of advanced glycosylation end products. Glucose -
based solutions are not very effective in high transporters, 
and inadequate ultrafiltration may result. Alternative os -
motic agents are available.
a. Icodextrin. T his is a polyglucose solution and is widely 
used. It is iso-osmolar and induces ultrafiltration by its 
oncotic effect (Mistry, 1994). Absorption of polyglucose 
is by the lymphatics and so is much slower compared 
with glucose. The oncotic effect and the associated ultra-
filtration are therefore more sustained than with glucose. 
For this reason, the main indication to use icodextrin is 
for the long nocturnal dwell in CAPD and for the long day 
dwell in automated peritoneal dialysis (APD), especially 
in patients with ultrafiltration failure. It is generally used 
for just one dwell daily as it is no more effective than glu-
cose for short dwell times. Icodextrin use is associated 
with unphysiologic blood levels of maltose and maltot -
riose, but no associated toxicity has been identified. The 
increased maltose levels will cause interference with the 
glucose dehydrogenase pyrroquinolinequinone assay 
(which reacts with both glucose and maltose) for blood 
glucose measurements. Therefore, blood glucose should 
be measured with other methods in patients using ico-
dextrin. In addition, use of icodextrin is associated with 
mild translocational hyponatremia ( owing to move -
ment of sodium-poor fluid from cells to the extracellular 
fluid). Measured amylase levels can be factitiously low, as 
a result of interaction between metabolites of icodextrin 
and commonly used amylase assays.
Icodextrin has been shown in randomized con -
trolled trials to improve ultrafiltration and volume status 
in PD patients, though not convincingly to reduce blood 
pressure (Davies, 2003). It has also been shown to im-
prove glycemic control, decrease weight gain, and lessen 
glucose-induced lipid abnormalities (Cho, 2013; Li, 2013). 
There is some evidence of better long-term preservation 
of peritoneal membrane function (Davies, 2005). Disad-
vantages are its extra cost, occasional skin reactions, and 
rare sterile peritonitis episodes.
b. Amino acid–based solutions.  T hese are used for nutritional 
supplementation as they are largely absorbed by the end 
of a 4- to 6-hour dwell (Jones, 1998). Studies have shown 
them to be modestly effective in nutritionally compro-
mised patients (Lo, 2003). They are reasonably effective 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   413 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
414
osmotically (comparable to the 1.36% glucose solu-
tion) but can be used only  once daily because in larger 
amounts they tend to cause acidosis, as well as a rise in 
the blood urea. These side effects can be addressed with 
oral alkali therapy and more dialysis, respectively.
6. Sterility and trace metals.  The preparation of PD solutions is
carefully regulated to ensure that the final product is bac-
teriologically safe and has very low concentrations of trace 
metals.
7. Dialysis solution temperature. PD solutions are usually warmed 
to body temperature prior to inflow. They can be instilled at 
room temperature, but uncomfortable lowering of the body 
temperature and shivering can result. The best warming
method is to use a heating pad or special oven. Microwave
ovens are frequently used, but this is not recommended by
most manufacturers because “hot spots” may be produced
during heating, in particular, in the transfer sets. When us-
ing a microwave oven, great care must be taken to avoid
overheating of the dialysis solution as this can chemically
alter the dextrose and may cause discomfort on instillation. 
Also, accidental boiling of the solution in a confined space
may cause an explosion. Heating methods that involve im-
mersing the PD solution container completely in water are
also not recommended because contamination can result.
B. Transfer sets.  The PD solution bag is connected to the pa-
tient’s peritoneal catheter by a length of plastic tubing called a 
“transfer set” (also sometimes called a “giving set”). There are 
three major types of transfer sets, each requiring a different 
method of performing the CAPD exchange. For the purpose 
of discussion, we will refer to them as the straight transfer set, 
the Y transfer set, and the double-bag system. Note that some 
transfer sets are connected to the peritoneal catheter via a 
short extension or adapter tubing (see what follows).
1. Straight transfer set. This system is now rarely used because it 
is associated with high rates of peritonitis. However, a brief 
description is helpful in understanding how more modern
systems have evolved.
a. Design. The straight transfer set is a simple plastic tube.
One end connects to the peritoneal catheter and the
other end to the dialysis solution bag. All exchanges are
performed by making and subsequently breaking the
connection between the transfer set and the bag. This
connection typically involves a spike or a Luer lock.
b. Exchange procedure. Dialysis is performed as follows:
1. Dialysis solution is instilled by gravity.
2. The empty bag and transfer set are rolled up and
stored in a pouch carried on the patient’s body.
3. Dwell time is typically 4–8 hours.
4. The bag is unrolled and placed on the floor. The dialy-
sate is drained into the bag. The bag is then discon-
nected from the transfer set and discarded.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   414 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 22 / Apparatus for Peritoneal Dialysis 415
5. A n ew bag is attached to the transfer set using a spike 
or Luer lock.
6. F resh dialysis solution is instilled.
Once every several months, the transfer set is 
changed. Extended-life transfer set tubing allows pa-
tients to dialyze for 6 months between transfer set 
changes.
2. The Y set (F ig. 22.2)
a. Design. T his is a Y-shaped piece of tubing that is attached 
by its stem to the patient’s catheter or extension tubing at 
the time of each solution exchange. During the exchange, 
the afferent and efferent limbs of the Y are attached to a 
bag of fresh PD solution and to a drain bag, respectively. In 
some cases, the drain bag is the empty solution bag that 
was used in the previous exchange. Most Y sets are not 
connected directly to the catheter but rather to a short 
(15–24 cm) adapter or extension tubing inserted between 
the catheter and the stem of the Y set. This adapter/  
extension tubing is sometimes confusingly called a trans-
fer set, but in this chapter that term is reserved for the 
tubing that connects the solution bag and drain bag to 
the extension tubing and catheter. The adapter/ extension 
tubing avoids the need for, and the risk of damage associ-
ated with, repeated clamping of the catheter.
b. Exchange procedure
1. S pike/lock: The fresh bag of PD solution is attached to 
the afferent limb of the Y set via a spike or Luer lock.
2. C onnect: The stem of the Y set is connected to the 
 extension tubing.
FIGURE 22.2 Y-set system using flush-before-fill. A: A small volume of fresh dialysis 
solution is drained directly into the drainage bag (either before or just after drainage of 
the abdomen). This act washes away any air or bacteria that may be present in the affer-
ent limb of the Y. B: Fresh solution is introduced through the rinsed transfer set. With the 
pre-attached double-bag system, the purpose of the “flush-before-fill” step is solely to 
flush out any air in the tubing.
AB
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   415 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
416
3. Drain: The stem and efferent limb of the Y are un-
clamped, and the spent dialysate is drained from the
peritoneal cavity into the drain bag.
4. Flush: With the stem of the Y set clamped, approxi-
mately 100 mL of fresh solution is flushed from the
new bag through the afferent limb of the Y into the ef-
ferent limb and so into the drain bag.
5. Fill: The efferent limb is clamped and the stem un-
clamped, and the peritoneal cavity is filled from the
new bag of PD solution.
6. Disconnect: The Y set is then disconnected from the
adapter/extension tubing.
The Y set was developed to free patients from the 
requirement to remain attached to the transfer set and 
empty bag between exchanges. Early studies revealed a 
more important benefit—a peritonitis rate significantly 
lower than that with the straight set. This is thought to 
be due to the flush-before-fill procedure used to prime 
the tubing. Bacteria that may be introduced during the 
connection procedure are washed out of the Y set into 
the empty drainage bag rather than into the patient, as 
happens with the straight set. Also, because the tubing 
and bags are disconnected from the patient between 
exchanges, less mechanical stress may be placed on the 
catheter exit site and tunnel. This may result in fewer 
episodes of minor trauma to the catheter exit site and 
tunnel, and therefore to fewer exit site and tunnel infec-
tions and associated peritonitis. Because of this lower 
peritonitis rate and the convenience of allowing the pa-
tient to disconnect between exchanges, Y-set systems 
increasingly displaced the straight system as the trans-
fer set of choice from the mid-1980s onward.
3. Pre-attached double-bag Y-set systems 
a. Design. These systems are a variant of the Y set in which
the solution bag comes preattached to the afferent
limb of the Y, obviating the need for any spike or Luer
lock connection. The drain bag is similarly preattached
to the efferent limb, and the only connection the pa-
tient needs to make is between the transfer set and the
adapter/
 extension tubing. A flush-before-fill step is still
performed, but the purpose is only to flush out residual
air and not to prevent peritoneal cavity contamination,
as this is no longer relevant in the absence of a need to
make a transfer set–to–solution bag connection.
These are now by far most popular systems because 
of their ease of use and because of evidence that they are 
associated with even lower rates of peritonitis than the 
standard Y sets (Kiernan, 1995).
b. Exchange procedure
1. Connect: The patient connects the new transfer set to 
the adapter/extension tubing.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   416 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 22 / Apparatus for Peritoneal Dialysis 417
2. Drain: The stem and efferent limb are unclamped, and 
spent dialysate is drained from the peritoneal cavity
into the drain bag.
3. Flush: The stem is clamped, and the afferent limb of
the Y is opened by breaking a “frangible” in the tubing. 
Then 100 mL of PD solution is flushed through from
the fill bag to the drain bag to remove residual air from 
the tubing.
4. Fill: The efferent limb is clamped, the stem is un-
clamped, and fresh PD solution is run into the perito-
neal cavity.
5. Disconnect: All limbs are clamped, and the transfer
set is disconnected from the extension tubing.
C. Various connectors for PD.  Over the years, a number of con-
nectors and associated devices have been developed and 
marketed in an attempt to reduce the possibility of bacterial 
contamination while making either the catheter–to–transfer 
set or the transfer set–to–solution bag connections.
1. Catheter–to–transfer set (or adapter/extension tubing–to–transfer
set) connection
a.
 Catheter connector. Early in the history of CAPD, simple,
plastic, plug-in connectors were used at the catheter–
to–transfer set junction. Cracking of the plastic connec-
tor and accidental disconnection were frequent events
that often led to peritonitis. A special Luer lock connec -
tor made of titanium was developed to prevent such
problems. Titanium was chosen for its light weight and
resistance to electrolyte-containing solutions. Designed
for easier handling and a tighter connection, the new
product functioned very well. Catheter–to–transfer set
connectors constructed from more durable plastics are
also available.
b. Quick connect–disconnect systems.  With the advent of the
disconnect Y sets and double bags, the need arose for an 
easy yet sterile connection at the catheter–to–transfer
set joint (or adapter/extension tubing–to–transfer set
joint). A number of connector designs for this purpose
are now available. Typically, they include a “Luer Lock”–
type mechanism with a recessed orifice and an iodine-
impregnated cap to minimize the risk of contamination. 
A more elaborate device is the “Stay Safe” device from
Fresenius Medical Care, which regulates the fill and
drain cycles as well as making the connection to the
adapter tubing.
2. Transfer set–to–solution bag connection.  With the advent of
double-bag systems, technologies to facilitate the connec-
tion between the transfer set and the PD solution bag are
less relevant. However, some of them are still used, and
brief mention will be made of them.
a. Spike-and-port design.  The spike-and-port design is the
oldest and simplest system used to connect the transfer
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   417 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
418
set to the PD solution bag. It is operated by pushing a 
spike located at the end of the transfer set into a port on 
the solution bag.
b. Easy-lock connectors. S piking the solution bag is difficult 
for many patients because it requires reasonably good 
vision, depth and sensory perception, and strength. 
Mistakes can result in contamination and subsequent 
peritonitis. The spike has thus been replaced in many 
transfer sets by a Luer lock– or screw-type system, re-
sulting in easier insertion. A modified form contains a 
recessed fluid pathway to prevent accidental contami -
nation, a reservoir that can be filled with an antiseptic 
solution (e.g., povidone–iodine), and a silicon O-ring to 
provide a tight seal.
 II. AUTOMATED PERITONEAL DIALYSIS.  A PD, using a cycler, is now al-
most as widely used as CAPD across the world, and in some coun-
tries, including the United States, the majority of PD patients are 
treated this way. APD is traditionally divided into APD with a 
day dwell, also known as continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis 
(CCPD), and “day dry” APD, also known as nocturnal intermittent 
peritoneal dialysis (NIPD), although the combination of cycler 
therapy at night with multiple daytime exchanges is also com -
monly used (see what follows) (Fig. 22.3). In APD with a day dwell, 
the patient carries PD solution in the abdominal cavity through-
out the day but performs no exchanges and is not attached to a 
transfer set. At bedtime, the patient hooks up to the cycler, which 
drains and refills the abdomen with solution, three or more times 
in the course of the night. In the morning, the patient, with the 
last dwell remaining in the abdomen, disconnects from the cycler 
and is free to go about daily activities. In day dry APD, the patient 
drains out fully at the end of the cycling period, and so the abdo-
men is “dry” all day. Because of the absence of a long-duration 
day dwell, clearances are generally lower on day dry APD, but its 
use may be indicated if there is good residual renal function or 
if there are mechanical contraindications to walking about with 
solution in the abdominal cavity (e.g., leaks, hernias, back pain).
A. Cyclers. T hese are machines that automatically cycle dialysis 
solution into and out of the abdominal cavity. Contemporary 
cyclers are not gravity dependent but instead use hydraulic 
pumps to deliver the solution from 3-, 5- or 6-L bags to a “fill 
bag” and from there into the abdomen. The solution in the fill 
bag is warmed before inflow. With the aid of pressure alarms, 
clamps, and timers, inflow, dwell, and outflow of solution is 
regulated and overfilling prevented.
Recent cycler models are small and light enough to pack 
in a large suitcase and carry on trips. Advanced design and 
computer technology make them simple to set up and op -
erate. The patient typically sets only the start time, volume 
of solution to be used, dwell volume, and length of dialysis 
or stop time desired. The cycler calculates the timing of the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   418 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 22 / Apparatus for Peritoneal Dialysis 419
 exchanges,  measures volume of ultrafiltrate, and optimizes 
drain and inflow time by measuring flow rates. The cycler 
changes from drain to fill when flow slows down rather than 
waiting for a preset time. It also tests to determine whether 
flow has stopped because of obstruction. Some models incor -
porate “smart cards, ” which can be used to program the cycler 
prescription and to record the actual prescription delivered to 
the patient.
An extremely useful feature is the ability to draw dialysis 
solution from a separate solution container for the last instil -
lation in the morning, called the “last bag option. ” This last 
FIGURE 22.3 Visual representation of common CAPD, APD, and hybrid prescriptions.
10 pm 7 am 10 pm
CYCLER CYCLER
DRY
“Day Dry” APD (NIPD)
10 pm 7 am 10 pm
CYCLER CYCLER
APD with Long Day Dwell (CCPD)
10 pm 7 am 10 pm12 noon
DRY
CYCLER CYCLER
APD with Morning Day Dwell
APD with Evening Day Dwell
10 pm 7 am 10 pm5 pm
DRY
CYCLER CYCLER
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   419 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
420
 inflow, which will be in place throughout the day, may require 
a higher dextrose concentration than the other exchanges. 
More often, nowadays, the last bag option is used to deliver an 
alternative solution such as icodextrin or amino acids for the 
long day dwell.
Typically, patients spend 8–10 hours a night cycling. Dwell 
volumes range from 1.5 to 3.0 L, and the number of  cycles usu-
ally varies from 3 to 10 per night. It is often possible to use a 
larger fill volume during APD compared with CAPD because of 
the lower intraperitoneal pressure in the recumbent position. 
A larger fill volume will increase clearance as well as ultrafiltra-
tion (owing to slower glucose absorption). The total amount of 
fluid used is typically between 8 and 18 L.
B. Dialysis solution. D ialysis solution for APD is the same as that 
used for CAPD. Most cyclers are fed by a tube containing a mul-
tipronged manifold that can attach to as many as eight  dialysis 
solution bags simultaneously to provide sufficient solution for 
the night. The total number of bags required, and thus the cost, 
can be reduced by using larger bags holding 3, 5, or 6 L of dialy-
sis solution, although lifting these can be a problem for older 
and frailer patients. Because some cyclers can be fed from two 
or more bags simultaneously, with appropriate selection of the 
dextrose concentrations of the solutions being hung, a number 
of intermediate dextrose concentrations (e.g.,  between those 
commercially available) can easily be delivered. Low GDP so-
lutions (both lactate-based and  bicarbonate–lactate-based 
solutions) are available in large-volume bags suitable for APD, 
whereas pure bicarbonate solution is not. Amino acids are oc-
casionally used during APD to provide nutritional support and 
to reduce glucose exposure. However, the fractional absorp-
tion of the amino acids in the bag is much lower because of  
the much shorter cycle duration during APD compared with 
CAPD. Icodextrin solution is not usually prescribed for deliv-
ery by cycler, except as a “last bag option. ”
C. APD connections
1. Transfer sets. O ne set of plastic tubing serves to interconnect 
several solution containers to the cycler and to connect the 
cycler to the patient. Shorter, simpler, and less expensive 
solution delivery sets are constantly being developed.
2. Catheter–to–transfer set connection.  T he catheter–to–  transfer 
set connection must be made every night and broken ev-
ery morning. Previously, many patients had a standard Luer 
lock connector at the end of the peritoneal catheter. The 
procedure for connecting the catheter connector to the 
transfer set was tedious because it required sterile proce-
dure and a lengthy antiseptic scrub. This older connector 
has largely been replaced by new, quick connect– disconnect 
systems that require no manual disinfection and are there-
fore much easier to use. Most of these systems also may fit 
CAPD transfer sets, allowing APD patients to use the CAPD 
method whenever desired (e.g., when traveling).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   420 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 22 / Apparatus for Peritoneal Dialysis 421
3. Transfer set–to–solution bag connections.  T he standard spike-
and-port or, more often, Luer lock connections are used to 
connect the multipronged transfer set to the dialysis solu-
tion containers. It is ironic that this step, which has largely 
disappeared from CAPD with the dominance of double 
bags, has become commonplace again with the growth in 
use of APD. In order to minimize the risk of contamination, 
the newer cyclers allow for a flush option after this connec-
tion has been made. The same connection technologies 
used to assist CAPD patients with visual impairment, ar -
thritis, or neuropathy can also assist APD patients in mak -
ing the transfer set–to–container connections.
D. T idal peritoneal dialysis (TPD) . T his variant of APD was designed 
to optimize solute clearance by leaving a significant volume 
of dialysis solution in the peritoneal cavity throughout the di-
alysis session. It was thought that this would allow diffusive 
clearance to continue throughout the cycling period. Initially, 
the peritoneal cavity is filled with a volume of solution selected 
to be as large as possible without causing discomfort. The vol-
ume used depends on patient size and habitus, but is typically 
2–3 L. When TPD was introduced, a 50 % tidal volume was 
common; for example, if 2 L is being used, the next fill volume 
(the tidal volume) is 1 L, the next drain volume is about 1 L, and 
so on. Clearances with TPD have been disappointing and, with 
usual solution volumes, are no better than those with similar 
amounts of solution delivered by conventional cycling. Clear -
ance benefits may be seen with high-  volume TPD where solu-
tion volumes are greater than 20 L, but these are not widely 
used because of high cost and inconvenience. Today, the com-
monest indications for TPD are to avoid low-drain alarms in 
patients with poor catheter function, or to avoid drain pain 
in patients who experience discomfort at the end of the drain 
phase. With this in mind, cyclers allow individualization of the 
tidal volume, and most commonly it is set to about 75%–85%. 
TPD cycles are quite short, usually totaling less than 60 min-
utes with dwell times for the replacement aliquot being only 
10–40 minutes. The peritoneal cavity is drained completely at 
the end of the dialysis session but can also be drained every 
third or fourth cycle in order to avoid cumulative ultrafiltra-
tion leading to a progressively greater dwell volume. At the end 
of the cycler session, a day dwell can be left in or drained with 
the peritoneal cavity left day dry.
1. T echnical problems.  C lassical high-volume TPD has a num-
ber of technical problems, making it difficult to recom -
mend for routine use. Therefore, mainly low-volume TPD is 
currently used.
a. Peritoneal catheter. F or classical high-volume TPD, the perito-
neal catheter must have excellent inflow and drain charac-
teristics as flow must be 180–200 mL/min during the drain 
phase. In contrast, low-volume TPD is often used to avoid 
alarms from low drain when the catheter function is poor.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   421 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
422
b. Cost. In adults, the advantages of TPD in terms of clear -
ance are seen only  with 20–30 L of solution per treat -
ment, and this is very expensive.
c. Ultrafiltration computations. The ultrafiltration  volume must 
be calculated and added to the drain volume with each
exchange; otherwise, the intra-abdominal volume will
become progressively larger. TPD is best performed with 
newer cyclers that have been modified so that the out -
flow volume can be set to trigger a change to dialysate in-
flow mode. When the preset outflow volume is reached
(e.g., 1.5 L), the machine switches immediately to inflow
and infuses a fresh 1.5 L of dialysis solution. This system
is quite different from that in most early cyclers, in which 
inflow/outflow cycles were regulated only by preset
 timers, not by volume.
d. Overfill. The risk of overfill of the peritoneal cavity
with consequent symptoms of raised intra-abdominal
pressure is greater with TPD than conventional APD,
perhaps because TPD is often used when catheter func-
tion is suboptimal (Cizman, 2014). Some cyclers have
safety settings in place to ensure full drainage of the day
dwell before cycling is initiated, and to ensure ultrafil -
trate does not progressively accumulate during cycling
(Blake, 2014).
III. APD WITH DAYTIME EXCHANGES.  Even APD with a day dwell does
not provide adequate clearances for some patients once residual 
renal function is lost. Additional exchanges and day dwells may
be required. These dwells improve clearance as the typical 14- to
16-hour, single day dwell in APD does not provide significant ad-
ditional clearance after the first 4–6 hours. These additional day
exchanges also improve ultrafiltration as the single day dwell is
often too long for effective net fluid removal. In fact, in many pa-
tients, especially higher transporters, a single dextrose day dwell
can result in significant net fluid resorption. Additional day ex -
changes can be done manually using standard CAPD transfer
sets, but this is relatively expensive in terms of solution and tub-
ing costs, and may be inconvenient for patients.
An alternative strategy involves using the cycler tubing to 
deliver the additional exchange(s). The patient returns to the cy-
cler in the afternoon or evening, reattaches to the transfer set, 
drains the dialysate that has been in the peritoneal cavity since 
that morning, and then refills from the large-volume solution 
bags (3–5 L) that will be used to provide solution for cycling that 
night. The patient then detaches from the transfer set but is able 
to reattach to the same tubing later to commence cycling that 
night. This is made possible by a modification of the transfer 
set that allows serial connections and disconnections to be per -
formed or by simply using “caps” to protect the respective end-
ings of the transfer set and adapter tubing while disconnected. 
This strategy, which has been described as using the cycler as 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   422 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 22 / Apparatus for Peritoneal Dialysis 423
a “docking station, ” can be easily performed with any of the newer 
generation of cyclers, and is less costly because no additional 
transfer set is required and because the solution can be drawn 
from more economical, large-volume solution bags. It has the ad-
ditional advantage that it can be set up for the patient in advance 
by a relative or a helper. However, for the working patient, the 
requirement to return to the cycler during the noncycling period 
may be a disadvantage, and in such cases, a manual CAPD-type 
exchange may be preferred.
In some patients, a second day dwell is not required for 
clearance reasons but a single long day dwell leads to net fluid 
resorption. In these cases, the cycler tubing can be used to drain 
the day dwell early without any subsequent fill (Fig. 22.3). A com-
mon alternative strategy in this setting is to use icodextrin solu-
tion, which maintains an adequate oncotic gradient even during 
16-hour day dwells.
References and Selected Readings
Blake PG. Drain pain, overfill, and how they are connected. Perit Dial Int. 2014;34:  
342–344.
Brown EA, et al. Survival of functionally anuric patients on automated peritoneal di-
alysis: the European APD Outcome Study. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003;14:2948–2957.
Cho Y, et al. Impact of icodextrin on clinical outcomes in peritoneal dialysis: a sys-
tematic review of randomized controlled trials. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28: 
1899–1907.
Cho Y, et al. Biocompatible dialysis fluids for peritoneal dialysis. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2014;3:CD007554.
Cizman B, et al. The occurence of increased intraperitoneal volume events in auto-
mated peritoneal dialysis in the US: role of programming, patient user actions and 
ultrafiltration. Perit Dial Int. 2014;34:434–442.
Davies SJ. Longitudinal membrane function in functionally anuric patients treated 
with automated peritoneal dialysis: data from EAPOS on the effects of glucose 
and icodextrin prescription. Kidney Int. 2005;67:1609–1615.
Davies SJ. What has balANZ taught us about balancing ultrafiltration with membrane 
preservation? Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28:1971–1974.
Davies SJ, et al. Icodextrin improves the fluid status of peritoneal dialysis pa-
tients: results of a double-blind randomized controlled trial. J Am Soc Nephrol . 
2003;14:2338–2344.
Feriani M, et al. Individualized bicarbonate concentrations in the peritoneal dialy-
sis fluid to optimize acid-base status in CAPD patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2004;19:195–202.
Johnson DW , et al. Effects of biocompatible versus standard fluid on peritoneal dialysis 
outcomes. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;23:1097–1107.
Jones M, et al. Treatment of malnutrition with 1.1% amino acid peritoneal dialysis solu-
tion: results of a multicenter outpatient study. Am J Kidney Dis. 1998;32:761–767.
Kiernan L, et al. Comparison of continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis-  related 
infections with different “Y-tubing” exchange systems. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
1995;5:1835–1838.
Li PK, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of glucose-sparing peritoneal dialysis in dia-
betic patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:1889–1900.
Li PK, et al. Comparison of double-bag and Y-set disconnect systems in continuous 
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis: a randomized prospective multicenter study. Am 
J Kidney Dis. 1999;33:535–540.
Lo WK, et al. A 3-year, prospective, randomized, controlled study on amino acid dialy-
sate in patients on CAPD. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42:173–183.
Mistry CD, et al. A randomized multicenter clinical trial comparing isosmolar icodex-
trin with hyperosmolar glucose solutions in CAPD. Kidney Int. 1994;46:496–503.
Rippe B, et al. Long-term clinical effects of a peritoneal dialysis fluid with less glucose 
degradation products. Kidney Int. 2001;59:348–357.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   423 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
424
Rodriguez AM, et al. Automated peritoneal dialysis: a Spanish multicentre study. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1998;13:2335–2340.
Tranaeus A; for Bicarbonate/Lactate Study Group. A long-term study of a  bicarbonate/
lactate-based peritoneal dialysis solution—clinical benefits. Perit Dial Int. 
2000;20:516–523.
Williams JD, et al. The Euro-Balance Trial: the effect of a new biocompatible peritoneal 
dialysis fluid (balance) on the peritoneal membrane. Kidney Int. 2004;66:408–418.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch022.indd   424 09/10/14   1:28 am