425
The success of peritoneal dialysis as renal replacement therapy 
hinges upon the patient possessing a functional peritoneal access. 
In the present era, access is obtained using a catheter device that 
bridges the abdominal wall and serves as a controlled cutaneoperi-
toneal fistula. Similar in principle to creation of an arteriovenous 
 access for hemodialysis, provision of a peritoneal access must con-
sider a number of patient factors that can influence flow function, 
durability, and resistance to complications.
 I. ACUTE AND CHRONIC CATHETERS. B ased on design and use,  catheters 
can be classified as acute or chronic.
A. Acute catheters
1. Rigid noncuffed catheters. Composed of relatively rigid plastic, 
these noncuffed tubes are provided in straight and slightly 
curved configurations with numerous side holes in the 
intraperitoneal segment. Insertion is performed by percu -
taneous puncture using an internal stylet. Because of the 
risk of infection, the generally accepted period of maximum 
use is 3 days. If a short course of peritoneal dialysis is antici-
pated or therapy must be initiated before a chronic cath -
eter can be placed, the temporary rigid catheter remains 
an option. These devices are available in kits containing the 
catheter, connecting tubing, and a scalpel.
2. Soft cuffed catheters. Most of the chronic catheters described 
more fully in the following section can serve as acute 
peritoneal access devices and are generally available in 
self-contained sets, permitting bedside placement using a 
percutaneous needle–guidewire approach to insert a peel-
away catheter introducer sheath. If it is anticipated that 
the need for peritoneal dialysis will be longer than a few 
days, a chronic catheter should be placed initially, when-
ever possible. While the trend for chronic catheters is to 
use two-cuff devices, one of the continuing demands for a 
 single-cuff catheter is to provide acute access. Compared 
to the rigid catheter, the one-cuff soft tube can be left in 
place indefinitely, and it is easier to insert and remove 
than two-cuff chronic devices. If long-term dialysis is likely 
Peritoneal Dialysis 
Catheters, Placement, 
and Care
John H. Crabtree and Arsh Jain
23
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   425 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
426
and the patient’s clinical condition permits, consideration 
should be given to implanting a chronic catheter with at 
least two cuffs.
B. Chronic catheters.  P resently, all chronic catheters are con-
structed of silicone rubber, a material well recognized for 
its biocompatibility and biodurability. A small percentage of 
catheters were previously constructed from polyurethane 
rubber, but these have not been commercially available since 
2010. Although the number of surviving polyurethane devices 
is rapidly diminishing, it is important to identify these cath -
eters because of the tendency of polyurethane rubber to 
develop stress fractures or to soften and rupture from chronic 
exposure to polyethylene glycol or ethanol present in certain 
topical antibiotic ointments and creams commonly used for 
chronic catheter exit-site prophylaxis. Polyurethane catheters 
can be recognized by a permanently bonded catheter adapter 
and they typically show permanent dark discoloration of the 
tubing after several years.
Figure 23.1 depicts a chronic peritoneal catheter showing 
its relationship to abdominal wall structures. Chronic cathe -
ters are most commonly supplied with two Dacron (polyester) 
cuffs, but as many as three cuffs may be present in extended 
two-piece catheters. Having at least two cuffs provides for bet-
ter immobilization of the catheter in the abdominal wall. The 
deep cuff is preferably implanted in the muscle to provide for 
firm tissue ingrowth and fixation of the catheter. The super -
ficial cuff is positioned in the subcutaneous tissues 2–4 cm 
from the exit site. When properly positioned, the superficial 
cuff serves as an effective barrier to entry of cutaneous debris 
FIGURE 23.1 Schematic of a coiled-tip Tenckhoff peritoneal catheter showing its proper 
relationship to adjacent anatomical structures.
Catheter
Epidermis
Subcutaneous cuff
Omentum
Bowel loops
Parietal peritoneum
Muscle Deep cuff
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   426 09/10/14   1:28 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 427
and  bacteria into the subcutaneous track and acts to limit the 
piston-like motion of the catheter in and out through the exit 
site that can drive these contaminants into the track.
The intraperitoneal segment of the catheter tubing has 
either a coiled-tip or straight-tip configuration with an end hole 
and numerous side holes. No significant difference in function-
ality has been demonstrated between coiled- and straight-tip 
catheters; however, previous randomized comparative studies 
involved small subject numbers with equivocal results, and the 
validity of a recent meta-analysis favoring straight-tip cathe-
ters is debatable. The incidence of inflow discomfort is greater 
with straight-tip catheters due to the jet effect of the dialysate 
from the end hole of the catheter. Coiled-tip catheters provide 
for better dispersion of the dialysate during inflow.
All recently manufactured chronic catheters incorporate 
a white radiopaque stripe along the longitudinal axis of the 
tubing which enables radiographic visualization. The stripe 
can also serve as a guide during implantation of the catheter 
to prevent accidental twisting or kinking of the catheter tub -
ing. The majority of adult catheters have a 2.6-mm internal 
bore. One catheter brand possesses a 3.5-mm bore and can 
be identified by its blue radiopaque stripe. While in vitro flow 
rates of the larger bore catheter are faster, this has not been so 
apparent in the in vivo state. The importance of recognizing 
the catheter bore size is to prevent inadvertent interchange of 
replacement catheter adapters that can result in a loose fit and 
accidental separation.
1. Standard abdominal catheters.  The coiled- and straight-tip
Tenckhoff catheters and their “swan neck” variants with a
preformed arc bend in the intercuff segment are illustrated 
in Figure 23.2A,B. These four catheters comprise the main-
stay of peritoneal access around the world. The primary
difference among these catheters is that the coiled-tip
configuration and preformed arc increase the cost of the
device. Standard abdominal catheters can be inserted by
any of the implantation methodologies.
2. Extended two-piece catheters. Originally designed as a prester-
nal catheter, the extended catheter comprises a one-cuff
abdominal catheter segment that attaches to a subcutane-
ous extension segment having one or two cuffs by using a
titanium connector to permit remote location of the exit
site to the upper chest (Fig. 23.2C). It has since been used
to provide remote locations of exit sites to the upper abdo-
men or the back region. The abdominal catheter can be
placed by any insertion method. The subcutaneous exten-
sion catheter is implanted using a vascular tunneling rod or 
a similar device supplied by the catheter manufacturer.
3. Alternative catheter designs.  Modifications of the basic
 Tenckhoff catheter design have been made to address prob-
lems with tissue attachment, tip migration, and pericath -
eter leaks. The Oreopoulos–Zellerman (Toronto Western)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   427 09/10/14   1:28 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
428
variation of the straight-tip catheter includes the addition 
of two silicone disks to the end of the tubing in  an attempt 
to hold bowel and omentum away from the side holes 
(Fig. 23.2D). The Di Paolo catheter is designed to discour -
age catheter tip migration by adding a tungsten weight to 
the end of the tubing to promote gravitational self- location 
to the pelvis (Fig. 23.2E). The Oreopoulos–  Zellerman and 
Missouri catheters have a Dacron flange adjacent to a 
silicone bead mounted below and contiguous with the 
deep cuff (Fig. 23.2F). The flange and bead are attached 
at a 45-degree angle on the Missouri version. Suturing the 
peritoneum between the flange and bead and stitching 
FIGURE 23.2 Shown are commonly used peritoneal catheters and alternative design 
features. A: Tenckhoff catheters with coiled-tip, two-cuff, and straight or swan neck 
intercuff segment. B: Tenckhoff catheters with straight-tip, two-cuff, and straight or swan 
neck intercuff segment. C: Extended catheter with coiled-tip, one-cuff abdominal catheter, 
two-cuff extension catheter with swan neck intercuff segment, and titanium connector. 
D: Straight-tip catheter with silicone disks. E: Straight-tip catheter with tungsten weight. 
F: Dacron flange and silicone bead below and adjoining the deep cuff.
A
B
C
DE F
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   428 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 429
the flange to the posterior rectus sheath were designed to 
reduce the occurrence of pericatheter leaks. Mounting the 
flange and bead at a 45-degree angle was intended to keep 
the catheter tip oriented toward the pelvis. None of the 
alternative configurations have been shown to outperform 
the standard Tenckhoff catheter design, but do increase the 
cost and difficulty of device insertion.
II. CATHETER SELECTION
A. Patient factors influencing catheter selection.  Patients come in all
sizes and shapes with a variety of medical conditions; there-
fore, it is somewhat naive to expect that one catheter type 
should fit all. Choice of catheter type should take into consid-
eration the patient’s belt line, obesity, skin creases and folds, 
presence of scars, chronic skin conditions, incontinence, 
physical limitations, bathing habits, and occupation. A basic 
inventory of several catheter types is required to provide cus -
tomization of the peritoneal access to the specific needs of the 
patient and to afford maximum flexibility in exit-site location. 
Figure 23.3 illustrates how a basic catheter inventory might be 
applied. Patients who wear their belt lines above the umbilicus 
are often best served with a catheter with a swan neck bend 
that allows the exit site to emerge below the belt line. Patients 
who wear their belt lines below the umbilicus are usually best 
fitted with a catheter having a straight intercuff segment that 
is bent to produce a laterally directed exit site emerging above 
the belt line. Individuals who have large rotund abdomens, 
severe obesity, drooping skin folds, intestinal stomas, feeding 
tubes, urinary or fecal incontinence, yeast intertrigo, or desire 
to take deep tub baths are ideal candidates for extended cath-
eters to produce upper abdominal or presternal exit sites.
B. Stencil-based preoperative mapping.  Some dialysis catheter man -
ufacturers produce marking stencils for the most commonly 
used catheter designs. Properly constructed stencils contain 
critical catheter design information, including the distance 
between the deep cuff and the coil, suggested subcutaneous 
tunnel configurations, and recommended exit-site locations 
relative to the position of the superficial cuff. Additional fea-
tures of a well-designed stencil plate permit its precise ori-
entation on the trunk region according to fixed anatomical 
landmarks, such as the pubic symphysis (representing the 
anterior upper border of the true pelvis) and the anatomical 
midline of the torso. Stencils permit accurate and reproduc-
ible association of the catheter design elements to these ana-
tomical landmarks to help determine the best catheter style 
and insertion site that will produce optimal pelvic position of 
the catheter coil and ideal exit-site location.
Figure 23.4 shows the use of the stencil for lower abdomi-
nal, upper abdominal, and chest catheter exit-site locations. 
The stencil should be initially used during a preoperative eval-
uation where the patient can be examined fully clothed and 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   429 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
430
in supine, sitting, and/or standing positions. The stencil can 
also be used at the time of the catheter insertion procedure to 
mark and/or verify the markings made during the preopera-
tive examination. During the preoperative mapping session in 
which the most appropriate catheter style is selected, only the 
exit-site cutouts need to be marked. At the time of the proce-
dure, the entire pattern including incision marks, tunnel track, 
cuff and exit-site cutouts are marked.
During the preoperative examination, the stencil is used 
to mark the exit sites of the standard abdominal catheters 
while the patient is supine. The patient then assumes a sitting 
or standing position, and the marked exit sites are checked to 
see which is best visible to the patient and does not conflict 
with the belt line, skin creases, or apices of bulging skin folds. 
If none of the marked exit sites for the standard abdominal 
FIGURE 23.3 Practical applications of a basic catheter inventory. A: Swan neck catheter 
with downwardly directed exit site emerging below a high-lying belt line. B: Straight in-
tercuff segment catheter with laterally directed exit site emerging above a low-lying belt 
line. C: Extended catheter with upper abdominal exit site for an obese rotund abdomen, 
lower abdominal skin folds, or incontinence. D: Extended catheter with upper chest exit 
site for severe obesity, multiple abdominal skin folds, intestinal stomas, or incontinence.
A
CD
B
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   430 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 431
catheters are satisfactory, the stencil is then used to map out 
either upper abdominal or presternal exit-site locations. Be 
aware that some manufacturers produce impractical stencils 
that show only the cutout pattern of a swan neck bend but 
do not allow for proper alignment of the stencil plate on the 
abdominal or chest wall.
 III. CA THETER PLACEMENT PROCEDURES
A. Best practices. A best practice is a technique or methodology 
that, through experience and research, has proven to reli-
ably lead to a desired result. Best practices for preoperative 
preparation and peritoneal catheter placement are listed in 
Tables 23.1 and 23.2. Adherence to a constellation of details 
is required to assure the best opportunity for creating a suc-
cessful long-term peritoneal access. Omission of any one of 
these best practices can lead to loss of the peritoneal catheter. 
It is recognized that some implantation techniques do not 
FIGURE 23.4 Stencil-based preoperative mapping for standard abdominal and extended 
catheters. This allows for selection of the most appropriate device type and insertion site 
that will produce the best pelvic position of the catheter tip and the optimal exit-site loca-
tion, based on patient-specific anatomical features.
Presternal
mapping
Abdominal
mapping of
insertion
incision
Upper
abdominal
mapping
Lower
abdominal
mapping
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   431 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
432
incorporate all of the best practices, such as percutaneous 
needle–guidewire approaches performed through the mid-
line or positioning the deep cuff above the level of the fascia. 
It is enough that the practitioner be aware of the deviations 
from recommended practice and be observant of the potential 
complications that may arise from such departures. In addi-
tion, some of the listed best practices will not be applicable to 
acute noncuffed temporary catheters.
B. Acute noncuffed catheter insertion.  The semirigid acute cath -
eter is inserted by percutaneous puncture using an internal 
stylet. A 1-cm midline or paramedian skin incision is made 
approximately 2.5 cm below the level of the umbilicus. A 
•	 Preoperative 	assessment	to	select	the	most	appropriate	catheter	type	and
exit-site location
•	 Bowel 	prep	the	day	before	surgery:	2	L	of	polyethylene	glycol	solution,	enema,	
or	stimulant	suppository
•	 Shower 	on	the	day	of	surgery	with	chlorhexidine	soap	wash	of	the	abdomen/
chest
•	 Removal 	of	body	hair	in	the	preoperative	holding	area,	preferably	with	electric
clippers
•	 Empty 	the	bladder	before	procedure;	otherwise,	Foley	catheter	should	be	
inserted
•	 Single 	preoperative	dose	of	prophylactic	antibiotic	to	provide
antistaphylococcal	coverage
Best	Practices	in	Patient	Preparation	for	PD	Catheter	
Insertion23.1
TABLE
•	 Operative 	personnel	are	attired	in	cap,	mask,	and	sterile	gown	and	gloves
•	 Surgical 	site	is	prepped	with	chlorhexidine–gluconate	scrub,	povidone–iodine	
(gel	or	scrub),	or	other	suitable	antiseptic	agent	and	sterile	drapes	applied
around	the	surgical	field
•	 Peritoneal 	catheter	is	rinsed	and	flushed	with	saline	and	air	squeezed	out	of
the	Dacron	cuffs	by	rolling	the	submerged	cuffs	between	fingers
•	 Paramedian 	insertion	of	the	catheter	through	the	body	of	the	rectus	muscle
•	 Deep 	catheter	cuff	positioned	within	or	below	the	rectus	muscle
•	 Pelvic 	location	of	the	catheter	tip
•	 Catheter 	flow	test	performed	to	confirm	acceptable	function
•	 Skin 	exit	site	directed	lateral	or	downward	(not	upward)
•	 Subcutaneous 	tunneling	instrument	should	not	exceed	the	diameter	of	the
catheter
•	 Exit 	site	should	be	smallest	skin	hole	possible	that	allows	passage	of	the	
catheter
•	 Position 	subcutaneous	cuff	2–4	cm	from	the	exit	site
•	 No 	catheter	anchoring	sutures	at	the	exit	site
•	 Attach 	transfer	(extension)	set	at	time	of	procedure
•	 Exit 	site	protected	and	catheter	immobilized	by	nonocclusive	dressing
Best	Practices	for	PD	Catheter	Insertion
23.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   432 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 433
hemostat clamp is used to spread down to the fascia. The sty-
let is inserted into the catheter until the pointed tip is exposed. 
Depth of penetration is controlled by grasping the catheter–
stylet assembly with the thumb and index finger. With the 
patient tensing the abdominal musculature, the catheter–
stylet assembly is advanced through the musculofascial layer 
with a twisting motion under constant controlled pressure 
until a “pop” or sudden drop in resistance is sensed, indicating 
entry into the peritoneal cavity. The patient is allowed to relax 
the abdominal muscles. Holding the catheter in place, the sty-
let is immediately withdrawn several centimeters to “hide” the 
pointed end. Gently, the catheter is advanced toward the pel-
vis without moving the stylet until satisfactory depth has been 
achieved. The stylet is removed, and the administration set is 
attached to the catheter. A suture or catheter holder is used 
to secure the temporary catheter. Alternatively, the abdomen 
may be prefilled with 1–2 L of dialysis solution before insert -
ing the catheter–stylet. A Veress needle (a Veress needle is a 
spring-loaded needle used to create pneumoperitoneum for 
laparoscopic surgery) or a 16G–18G intravenous cannula 
is inserted into the peritoneal cavity through the incision 
described earlier to perform the prefill.
C. Chronic catheter placement.  M ethods for insertion of chronic 
peritoneal catheters include placement by percutaneous 
guidewire technique (performed blindly or with image guid-
ance), the YTEC laparoscopic-assisted approach, open surgi-
cal dissection, and laparoscopic implantation. Optionally, the 
implantation technique may include extending the catheter 
to a remote exit-site location and/or embedding the external 
limb of the catheter tubing under the skin with delayed exter -
nalization when initiation of dialysis is needed. An overview of 
each of the implantation approaches will be presented.
1. Percutaneous needle–guidewire technique.  Placement of cath -
eters by blind percutaneous puncture is performed using a 
modification of the Seldinger technique. The convenience 
of this approach is that it can be performed at the bedside 
under local anesthesia using prepackaged self-contained 
kits that include the dialysis catheter. The abdomen is pre-
filled with 1.5–2 L dialysis solution instilled with an 18G 
introducer needle inserted through a 1.5- to 2-cm infra-
umbilical or paramedian  incision. Alternatively, a Veress 
needle may be used to perform the prefill. A guidewire 
is passed through the needle into the peritoneal cavity 
and directed toward the retrovesical space. The needle 
is withdrawn. A dilator with overlying peel-away sheath 
is advanced through the fascia over the guidewire. The 
guidewire and dilator are removed. Stiffened over a stylet, 
the dialysis catheter is directed through the sheath toward 
the pelvis. As the deep catheter cuff advances, the sheath 
is peeled away. The deep cuff is advanced to the level of 
the fascia.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   433 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
434
The addition of fluoroscopy to the procedure permits 
confirmation of needle entry into the peritoneal cavity by 
observing the flow of injected contrast solution around 
loops of bowel. The retrovesical space is identified by con-
trast pooling in the appropriate location. The guidewire 
and catheter are advanced to this site. Ultrasonography 
can be used in a similar fashion. The remainder of the pro-
cedure is as described for blind placement. Although the 
radiopaque tubing stripe permits fluoroscopic imaging of 
the final catheter configuration, the proximity of adhesions 
or omentum cannot be assessed. Percutaneous guidewire 
placement techniques usually leave the deep catheter 
cuff external to the fascia. After testing flow function, the 
catheter is then tunneled subcutaneously to the selected 
exit site.
2. YTEC procedure.  The YTEC procedure is a proprietary
 laparoscopic-assisted technique of peritoneal catheter
placement. A 2.5-mm trocar with an overlying plastic
sleeve is inserted percutaneously into the peritoneal cavity 
through a paramedian incision. The obturator of the trocar 
is removed, permitting insertion of a 2.2-mm laparoscope
to confirm peritoneal entry. The scope is withdrawn and
0.6–1.5 L of room air is pumped into the abdomen with a
syringe or hand bulb. The scope is reinserted and the over -
lying cannula and plastic sleeve are visually directed into
an identified clear area within the peritoneal cavity. The
scope and cannula are withdrawn, leaving the expandable
plastic sleeve to serve as a conduit for blind insertion of
the catheter over a stylet into the identified clear area. The 
plastic sleeve is withdrawn and the deep cuff is pushed into 
the rectus sheath. After testing flow function, the catheter
is tunneled subcutaneously to the selected exit site.
3. Open surgical dissection.  A paramedian incision is made
through the skin, subcutaneous tissues, and anterior rectus 
sheath. The underlying muscle fibers are split to expose the 
posterior rectus sheath. A small hole is made through the
posterior sheath and peritoneum to enter the peritoneal
cavity. A purse-string suture is placed around the opening.
The catheter, usually straightened over an internal stylet,
is advanced through the peritoneal incision toward the
pelvis. Despite being an open procedure, the catheter is
advanced mostly by feel, therefore, blindly, into the perito-
neal cavity. The stylet is partially withdrawn as the catheter 
is advanced until the deep cuff abuts the posterior fascia.
After satisfactory placement has been achieved, the stylet
is completely withdrawn and the purse-string suture is tied. 
Encouraging the catheter tip to remain oriented toward
the pelvis is achieved by oblique passage of the catheter
through the rectus sheath in a craniocaudal direction. The
catheter tubing is exited through the anterior rectus sheath 
at least 2.5 cm cranial to the level of the purse-string suture 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   434 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 435
and deep cuff location. Attention to detail in placement of 
the purse-string suture and repair of the anterior fascia is 
imperative to prevent pericatheter leak and hernia. The 
catheter is tunneled subcutaneously to the selected exit 
site following a satisfactory test of flow function.
4. Laparoscopic. Laparoscopy provides a minimally invasive
approach with complete visualization of the peritoneal
cavity during the catheter implantation procedure. The
advantage of laparoscopic catheter placement over other
approaches is the ability to proactively employ adjunctive
procedures that significantly improve catheter outcomes.
Laparoscopically guided rectus sheath tunneling places the 
catheter in a long musculofascial tunnel oriented toward
the pelvis and eliminates catheter tip migration. Observed
redundant omentum that lies in juxtaposition to the cath -
eter tip can be displaced from the pelvis into the upper
abdomen and fixed to the abdominal wall (omentopexy).
Compartmentalizing adhesions that may affect complete -
ness of dialysate drainage can be divided. Intraperito -
neal structures that siphon up to the catheter tip during
the intraoperative irrigation test can be laparoscopically
resected, including epiploic appendices of the sigmoid
colon and uterine tubes. Previously unsuspected abdomi-
nal wall hernias can be identified and repaired at the time
of the catheter implantation procedure.
Through a lateral abdominal wall puncture site 
remote from the point of intended catheter placement, the 
abdomen is insufflated with gas through a Veress needle 
to create an intraperitoneal working space. A laparoscopic 
port and laparoscope are inserted. Under laparoscopic 
guidance, the catheter is introduced at a second puncture 
site and placed in a musculofascial tunnel oriented toward 
the peritoneum, usually through the use of a port device 
that creates the rectus sheath tunnel. Some variations of 
the technique use a third laparoscopic port site to intro-
duce laparoscopic forceps to assist in the catheter tunnel-
ing process. The catheter tip is directed into the true pelvis 
under visual control. The deep cuff of the catheter is posi-
tioned in the rectus muscle just below the anterior fascial 
sheath. A purse-string fascial suture is placed around the 
catheter at the level of the anterior sheath to minimize the 
risk of pericatheter leak. The laparoscope is left in place 
until a test irrigation of the catheter demonstrates success-
ful flow function. After any indicated adjunctive procedures 
are completed, the catheter is tunneled subcutaneously to 
the selected exit site.
5. Special access procedures
a. Extended catheters.  The abdominal segment of two-piece
extended catheters can be implanted by any of the afore-
mentioned insertion techniques. A secondary incision
is made in the vicinity of the planned upper abdominal,
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   435 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
436
presternal, or back exit site. A marking stencil is invalu-
able in devising the location of the secondary incision 
and exit site. The measured distance between the abdom-
inal insertion incision and the secondary incision is used 
to calculate how much tubing length will be trimmed 
from one or both of the catheter segments in order to 
correctly span the distance. The trimmed catheters are 
joined with a titanium connector, and the linked cath-
eter segments are tunneled on the surface of the fascia 
from the abdominal insertion site to the remote second-
ary incision with a tunneling rod. The extension catheter 
is then passed from the secondary incision through the 
exit site using a stylet to complete the procedure.
b. Catheter embedding procedure.  Catheter embedding has
been characterized as the “ AV fistula of peritoneal dialy-
sis. ” The catheter is implanted in advance of intended use 
and allowed to “mature” in the subcutaneous bed until 
the start of dialysis (Fig. 23.5). The catheter is allowed 
to heal in the sterile environment of the subcutaneous 
space without the potential contamination from the 
FIGURE 23.5 Illustrated is the embedded catheter strategy. A: External limb of the 
catheter tubing is embedded under the skin at the time of catheter placement. B: External 
limb of the catheter is externalized when the time to initiate dialysis has arrived.
A
B
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   436 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 437
presence of an exit wound. Firm tissue ingrowth into the 
cuffs and absence of biofilm formation have been specu-
lated to reduce catheter infection–related peritonitis. 
Another important attribute of catheter embedding is 
greater patient acceptance for earlier commitment to 
peritoneal dialysis by catheter placement ahead of time. 
The patient is not burdened with catheter maintenance 
until dialysis is needed. The need for insertion of vascu-
lar catheters and temporary hemodialysis can be averted 
in patients previously implanted with an embedded 
catheter. When needed, the catheter is simply exterior -
ized and the patient begins dialysis with full volumes, 
avoiding the need for a break-in period. The embedding 
technique permits more efficient surgical scheduling of 
catheter implantation as a nonurgent procedure and 
helps to reduce stress on operating room access. Disad-
vantages of the catheter embedding strategy include the 
need for two procedures (implantation and exterioriza -
tion) as opposed to one and the possibility of futile place-
ment in the event of a change in the patient’s condition.
Catheter embedding can be incorporated into 
any of the implantation approaches using any catheter 
device. The catheter is temporarily externalized through 
the future skin exit site prior to embedment. The exit-site 
scar serves as a landmark to know where to come back to 
for externalization. After acceptable flow function of the 
catheter is confirmed, the tubing is flushed with hepa-
rin, plugged, and buried in the subcutaneous tissue. To 
minimize the risk of hematoma or seroma and to facili -
tate subsequent externalization, the catheter should be 
embedded in a linear or curvilinear subcutaneous track 
using a tunneling stylet as opposed to curling the tubing 
into a subcutaneous pocket. Embedding should not be 
performed if anticipated need for dialysis is <4 weeks. 
Externalization of embedded catheters is an office pro -
cedure. Catheters have been embedded for months to 
years, with an 85%–93% immediate function rate upon 
externalization. Overall, 94%–99% are  successfully used 
for dialysis after radiologic or laparoscopic  revision of 
nonfunctioning catheters.
 I V. CA THETER BREAK-IN PROCEDURES
A. Acute catheters. T here is no specific strategy to break-in acute 
catheters. As they are to be used acutely, there often are few 
options. Some have suggested an incremental approach to 
increasing the peritoneal volume.
B. Chronic catheters.  T here is no particular evidence-based 
approach for initiating patients onto peritoneal dialysis. The 
following are some considerations:
1. Catheter irrigation.  Performance of postoperative irriga -
tion ( flushing) when immediate use of the catheter is not 
 anticipated is covered in Section VII.A.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   437 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
438
2. Chronic nonurgent start.  When possible, exchanges should
be delayed for 2 or more weeks after catheter insertion
to allow for healing and prevent leakage. Either chronic
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis or automated peritoneal
dialysis can be initiated at that time. The size of the dwell
volume can be increased over the course of the training
period. For patients treated with automated peritoneal
dialysis, leaving the patient with no last fill for a number of 
weeks may help reduce the risk of leaks. While the catheter 
is healing, it is suggested that the patient limit his or her
physical activities for 4–6 weeks, especially activities that
could increase intra-abdominal pressure.
3. Chronic urgent start. A growing body of literature suggests that 
starting patients immediately ( <2 weeks after catheter
insertion) on peritoneal dialysis is feasible. In some stud-
ies, the leak rate does not appear to be significantly higher
than nonurgent starts. Furthermore, an urgent start on
peritoneal dialysis provides an alternative to those patients 
who would otherwise initiate therapy on hemodialysis
with a central venous catheter. Surgically implanted cath -
eters can be used immediately postinsertion, provided that 
a tight seal is created at the peritoneum to prevent leaks.
Percutaneously inserted catheters can also be used imme-
diately; however, because of the increased risk of leak, the
feasibility of this strategy should be assessed according to
the historical experience of the center.
No standard dialysis prescription exists for patients 
starting peritoneal dialysis urgently; however, most have 
described an incremental approach. Such an approach 
might consist of initiating exchanges with approximately 1 
L volumes and increasing the amount by 250–500 mL per 
week. Commencing therapy with the patient in the supine 
position will minimize the risks of dialysate leaks from 
increased intra-abdominal pressure. It has been demon-
strated that when surgically placed catheters are appro -
priately secured, full-volume exchanges can be started 
immediately. As with chronic catheters, patients should 
be advised to reduce physical activity for about 4–6 weeks 
after insertion to allow for proper healing.
 V. ACUTE COMPLICATIONS OF CATHETERS
A. Preperitoneal placement.  During insertion of acute noncuffed 
catheters, if the stylet of the catheter fails to enter the peri-
toneal cavity, the semirigid catheter may be inadvertently 
advanced into the preperitoneal space. Similarly, unintended 
preperitoneal position of the introducer needle or Veress nee-
dle can occur during chronic catheter placement using per -
cutaneous needle–guidewire approaches. Dialysis solution 
inflow will be slow and often painful. Outflow will be minimal, 
and the effluent may become blood-tinged. If this occurs, 
drain as much fluid as possible, then remove the catheter and 
insert at another site.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   438 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 439
B. Blood-tinged dialysis effluent.  In addition to preperitoneal cath -
eter placement, blood-tinged outflow can result from injury of 
a blood vessel in the abdominal wall or mesentery. The return 
will usually clear with continued dialysis.
C. Serious complications. Grossly bloody effluent, fall in hematocrit, 
or signs of shock signify large blood vessel injury. Urgent lapa-
rotomy is usually required. Unexplained polyuria and glycos -
uria suggest accidental puncture of the urinary bladder. If the 
needle has entered the bowel, instillation of dialysate will be 
accompanied by pain and/or an urgent need to defecate. In 
case of suspected bowel entry with a small-bore acute catheter 
or needle, it is sometimes possible to merely remove the cath-
eter or needle and observe the patient carefully while treat -
ing with intravenous antibiotics. Catheter insertion should be 
delayed a few days until it is certain that there are no com-
plications as a result of penetrating the bowel. Unrecognized 
bowel entry may be heralded by feces or gas in the effluent or 
watery diarrhea having high glucose content. Surgical inter -
vention is often required, and appropriate consultation should 
be obtained. If surgical exploration is planned, it is helpful to 
leave the catheter in place so that the site of perforation can be 
more easily identified.
 VI. COMPLICATIONS OF CHRONIC PERITONEAL CATHETERS.  Mechanical 
and infectious complications are the two most common reasons 
for interruption of dialysis therapy and loss of the peritoneal 
catheter. Early and appropriate interventions can allow success -
ful resumption of dialysis, avoid removal of the catheter, or, in the 
event of catheter loss, minimize the time before return to perito-
neal dialysis.
A. Mechanical complications.  M echanical complications of the 
catheter include pericatheter leaks, infusion and drain pain, 
outflow failure, and catheter tip migration.
1. Pericatheter leak.  This complication is usually related to 
catheter implantation technique, timing of initiation of 
dialysis, and strength of abdominal wall tissues. When 
dialysis is initiated, subcutaneous leakage may occur at 
the catheter insertion site and usually manifests itself as 
fluid appearing through the incision or at the exit site. 
Questionable leaks can be verified by a positive glucose 
dipstick indicating high glucose concentration of the 
seeping fluid. Delaying initiation of dialysis for 10–14 
days following catheter placement minimizes the risk for 
developing a leak. Temporarily discontinuing dialysis for 
1–3 weeks usually results in spontaneous cessation of an 
early leak. Dramatic early leaks may indicate purse-string 
suture failure or technical error in wound repair and 
demands immediate exploration. Leakage through the exit 
site or insertion incision leaves the patient prone to tunnel 
infection and peritonitis. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy 
should be employed. Persistent leaks warrant catheter 
replacement.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   439 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
440
Late pericatheter leaks are caused by pericannular 
hernia or occult tunnel infections, with separation of the 
cuffs from the surrounding tissues. The occurrence of 
 pericannular hernia is largely influenced by the  location 
and degree of fixation of the deep cuff. At the parietal 
 peritoneal surface, the mesothelium reflects along the 
 surface of the catheter to reach the deep cuff. If the deep 
cuff was placed outside of the muscle wall or the cuff 
shifts outward because of weak midline fascial attach-
ments, then the peritoneal lining actually extends above 
the fascial layer, creating the potential for a pseudohernia 
and pericatheter leak. If the abdominal wall is weak, the 
track may dilate and develop a true hernia. Most late leaks 
and pericatheter 
 hernias are best managed by catheter 
replacement.
2. Infusion pain.  Pain during dialysate infusion is usually
observed in new patients initiating dialysis and is often
transient in nature, spontaneously disappearing over sev-
eral weeks. Persistent infusion pain is commonly associated 
with the acidity (pH 5.2–5.5) of conventional lactate-
buffered dialysis solutions. Use of bicarbonate/  lactate-
buffered dialysis solutions (pH 7.0–7.4) can eliminate this
pain. If buffered solutions are not available, manual addi-
tion of bicarbonate to each dialysis bag (4–5 mmol/L) is
required to treat acid-related infusion pain. Alternatively, a 
1% or 2% lidocaine solution added to the dialysate (5 mL/L) 
may be tried to assuage infusion discomfort.
Other causes of dialysate-related pain include hyper -
tonic glucose solutions, aged dialysis solution, overdisten-
tion of the abdomen, or extremes in dialysate temperature. 
Compared to coiled dialysis catheters, straight-tip cath -
eters appear to be associated with a higher incidence of 
mechanical inflow pain caused by the jet effect of the dialy-
sate from the end hole of the tubing. Catheter malposition 
with the tip against the abdominal wall or tube restriction 
by attached tissues can produce both inflow and outflow 
pain. Slower infusion rates and incomplete drainage may 
diminish these symptoms; however, transluminal catheter 
manipulation or laparoscopic exploration should be con -
sidered for flow pain that is persistent or accompanied 
with hydraulic dysfunction with or without associated 
catheter malposition.
3. Drain pain.  Pain during outflow is common, especially
toward the end of the drain, and is especially frequent in
the early days after initiation of dialysis. As the intraperi-
toneal structures siphon up to the catheter tip during the
drain, it causes the catheter to bump up against the exqui-
sitely sensitive parietal peritoneum. The pain is frequently
experienced in the genital or anorectal region. Drain pain
is more frequently a problem with automated peritoneal
dialysis due to hydraulic suction on the peritoneal lining.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   440 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 441
Catheters implanted too low on the abdominal wall can 
wedge tubing into the deep pelvis, resulting in drain pain 
from early closure of pelvic viscera around the catheter 
tip. Similarly, constipation with crowding of the bowel 
around the catheter in the pelvis can cause or contribute 
to the severity of the symptoms. The drain pain sometimes 
resolves with time or with treatment of associated consti-
pation. If persistent, it can be managed by avoiding com-
plete drainage of the peritoneal effluent. In cycler patients, 
this can be achieved by performing some degree of tidal 
peritoneal dialysis. In resistant cases of drain pain, repo-
sitioning of the catheter may be attempted, but even this 
does not always resolve the problem.
4. Outflow failure.  Catheter flow dysfunction is usually mani-
fested as outflow failure; therefore, the volume of drained
dialysate is substantially less than the inflow volume, and
there is no evidence of pericatheter leakage. Outflow failure 
usually occurs soon after catheter placement, but it may
also commence during or after an episode of peritonitis, or
at any time during the life of the catheter. Evaluation and
treatment for the common causes of flow dysfunction are
as follows:
a. Constipation and urinary retention.  The most common cause
of outflow dysfunction is constipation. Distended rec-
tosigmoid colon may block the catheter side holes or
displace the catheter tip into a position of poor drainage 
function. Extrinsic bladder compression on the catheter
due to urinary retention occurs less frequently. Abdomi-
nal radiography is helpful to look for a fecal-filled colon
and catheter displacement. Constipation is treated with
oral administration of an emollient, such as 70% sorbitol 
solution, 30 mL every 2 hours until the desired effect is
achieved. Polyethylene glycol solution, 2 L, ingested over 
a period of 4–6 hours is usually effective in persistent
cases. Stimulant laxatives such as bisacodyl and saline
enemas are reserved for refractory cases since chemical
and mechanical irritation of the colonic mucosa have
been associated with transmural migration of bacteria
and development of peritonitis.
b. Tubing kink.  Mechanical kinking of the catheter tubing
is usually accompanied by two-way obstruction. A flat-
plate radiograph of the abdomen is often helpful in iden-
tifying a kink in the catheter tubing. Catheter revision or 
replacement will be required.
c. Fibrin strands and plugs.  Heparin should be added to the
dialysate whenever fibrin strands or plugs are visible
in the effluent. Heparin is more useful prophylactically
than therapeutically, preventing the formation of fibrin
clots and extension of existing clots. Once outflow
obstruction has occurred, irrigation of the catheter with
heparin is usually unsuccessful in recovering function.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   441 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
442
If flow function is not restored with heparin, then 
thrombolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen activator 
(tPA) may be attempted. Failure to dislodge intraluminal 
debris by brisk irrigation of the catheter with saline is fol-
lowed by instillation of tPA using the protocol described 
in Table 23.3. If catheter obstruction is due to a fibrin clot, 
recovery of flow function with tPA has been reported at 
nearly 100%. Because of cost considerations, the dose of 
tPA (used in a dilution of 1 mg/mL) has been based on the 
calculated volume of the catheter assembly; however, no 
adverse consequences have been documented for cath -
eter overfill or repeated administration.
d. Catheter manipulation for outflow failure.  If treatment of 
 constipation and fibrinolytic therapy are not successful 
in restoring drainage function , and if urinary retention 
and tubing kinks have been excluded, the catheter is pre-
sumed to be obstructed by omentum or other adherent 
intraperitoneal structures. Interventions to resolve cath-
eter obstruction are now most commonly performed 
using radiologic and laparoscopic techniques.
1. Radiologic intervention.  Fluoroscopic guidewire ma -
nipulation has been used to redirect displaced and 
obstructed catheters. Stiff guidewire manipulation 
of catheters with a swan neck bend can be difficult. 
Total Volume of Catheter and Transfer Set Assembly
Adult Catheter Size
Catheter 
 Volume (mL)a
Total Volume 
with Baxter 
Transfer 
Set (mL)b
Total  Volume 
with Fresenius 
Extension 
Set (mL)b
Internal 
 Diameter (cm) Length (cm)
0.26c
0.26c
0.26c
0.35d
42
57
62
62
2.2
3.0
3.3
6.0
4.2
5.0
5.3
8.0
4.7
5.5
5.8
8.5
Protocol:
1.	 Aspirate 	contents	of	catheter	to	remove	any	povidone-iodine	from	transfer	set
2.	 Slowly 	but	steadily	instill	110%	calculated	volume	of	tPA	(1	mg/mL)	into	
catheter
3.	 Allow	tPA	to	remain	in	catheter	for	60	minutes
4.	 Aspirate 	tPA	from	catheter
5.	 With 	60-mL	syringe,	briskly	irrigate	the	catheter	with	saline	to	determine	
patency	and	to	dislodge	any	fibrin	clots
6.	 Repeat 	process	if	catheter	remains	obstructed
a Volume = πr 2h; π = 3.14, r = radius of catheter bore, h = height (length) of tube.
b Baxter 6-in transfer set = 2 mL; Fresenius 12-in extension set = 2.5 mL.
c Internal diameter of conventional Tenckhoff catheters.
d Internal diameter of Flex-Neck catheter.
Tissue	Plasminogen	Activator	Protocol	for	Thrombolysis	of	
Obstructed	Peritoneal	Dialysis	Catheters23.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   442 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 443
Forceful straightening of the subcutaneous tunnel can 
produce tunnel track trauma and infection. Translu -
minal manipulation is not practical for extended cath-
eters because of the long tubing length.
A preprocedure dose of prophylactic antibiotics 
to provide antistaphylococcal coverage is advisable. 
Particular attention must be given to antiseptic prep -
aration of the catheter tubing in addition to creating 
a sterile surgical field for the procedure. The transfer 
set is disconnected and discarded. After catheter ma-
nipulation is performed, restoration of flow function 
is checked by syringe irrigation. Frequently, multiple, 
separate manipulation procedures are required, with 
long-term flow function restored in only 45%–73% of 
cases. Failure rates for fluoroscopic manipulation as 
high as 90% were observed when patients had an an-
tecedent history of abdominopelvic surgery or perito-
nitis, suggesting that adhesions play a major factor in 
technical failures.
2. Laparoscopic intervention.  Laparoscopy has become an
invaluable method of evaluating and resolving cathe-
ter flow obstruction. Because laparoscopy can reliably 
identify the source of flow dysfunction and provide a
means for definitive treatment, it is often considered
as the next step in the management sequence after
other causes for obstruction have been excluded. The
dialysis catheter frequently can be used to perform
the initial gas insufflation of the abdomen since most
catheter obstructions represent outflow problems.
Alternatively, a Veress needle is used for insufflation,
or the initial laparoscopic port is placed by direct cut-
down on the peritoneum. Laparoscopic exploration is 
performed to identify the source of obstruction. Ad-
ditional laparoscopic ports for introduction of oper -
ating instruments may be required depending on the
findings.
Omental attachment to the catheter coil with 
displacement of the tubing out of the pelvis is a 
common cause of outflow dysfunction. Omental en-
trapment is relieved by using laparoscopic grasping 
forceps to strip the omentum from the catheter. The 
catheter tip is temporarily exteriorized through one of 
the port sites to facilitate removal of residual intralu-
minal tissue debris. The omentum is laparoscopically 
sutured to the upper abdominal region (omentopexy) 
to keep it away from the catheter. Redundant epiploic 
appendices of the sigmoid colon and uterine fimbria 
may siphon up to the catheter coil and produce ob-
struction. Laparoscopic resection of the involved epi-
ploic appendices and uterine tube prevents recurrent 
obstruction.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   443 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
444
Obstruction of the catheter by adhesive scar tis-
sues can be treated by laparoscopically dividing the 
adhesions or simply pulling the catheter free of the 
adhesions if they are not too extensive. Adhesiolysis 
for poor drainage function, especially after peritonitis, 
is associated with a 30% failure rate secondary to re-
forming of adhesions.
Catheter tip migration to a position of poor drain-
age function is frequently caused by shape-memory 
resiliency forces of a straight catheter bent into a con-
figuration that imposes excessive stress on the tubing. 
Simply repositioning the catheter will be followed by 
recurrence of the migration in a high percentage of 
cases. Laparoscopic suturing of the catheter tip to a 
pelvic structure has an unacceptable rate of failure 
due to erosion of the suture. A more reliable approach 
is to laparoscopically place a suture sling in the supra-
pubic region through the abdominal wall and around 
the catheter. A sling will maintain the catheter toward 
the pelvis and not hinder catheter removal if required 
at a later date.
5. Cuff extrusion through the exit site.  Erosion of the superficial 
cuff through the exit site can result from positioning the 
cuff too close (< 2 cm) to the exit wound during catheter 
placement. In addition, excessive bending of the catheter 
with a straight intercuff segment to produce a downward 
exit direction can induce mechanical stresses on the tub-
ing. In combination with close proximity of the cuff to 
the exit site, the shape-memory forces of a catheter bent 
into this configuration can lead to tube straightening 
over time with migration of the superficial cuff toward 
and through the exit site. Another cause for superficial 
cuff erosion that can eventually result in extrusion of the 
entire catheter is outer displacement of the tubing due to 
poor location and fixation of the deep cuff. Lastly, exit-
site infection extending to the superficial cuff may cause 
it to separate from the surrounding tissues and extrude 
through the exit site.
An extruded cuff becomes a reservoir of bacteria 
within the vicinity of the exit wound. Exacerbated by daily 
wetting of the cuff during routine exit-site care, the pres-
ence of this infected sponge interferes with maintaining 
acceptable exit-site hygiene. Using a scalpel blade applied 
parallel to the cuff surface, the cuff can be shaved in repeti-
tive slices until all of the cuff material is removed. The 
blade should be changed often to assure ease in perform-
ing the shave without applying undue pressure on the 
tubing. Extra care should be taken when shaving the cuff 
from 3.5-mm internal bore catheters (identified by the blue 
radiopaque stripe), as this thin-walled tubing can be easily 
damaged. Alternatively, catheters with extruded cuffs can 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   444 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 445
be managed by replacing the cuffed tubing segment by a 
splicing procedure, as described in the following section.
B. Catheter infection and management. Details of antibiotic treatment 
for catheter infections are discussed in Chapter 27. The even-
tual outcome of a chronic exit-site infection with superficial 
cuff involvement is a tunnel abscess or progression of the tun-
nel infection to the peritoneal cavity, producing concurrent 
peritonitis. Early recognition of chronic exit-site and tunnel 
infection is essential to provide the best opportunity for cath-
eter salvage. Interventions for catheter infection are reviewed 
in what follows:
1. Exit-site and tunnel infection. Exit-site infection presents as red-
ness, swelling, and tenderness at the exit site. With tunnel
involvement, the signs of infection extend along the sub-
cutaneous course of the catheter. In most cases, exit-site
and tunnel infections are accompanied by purulent dis -
charge from the exit site. In chronic smoldering cases, the
exit-site skin is loose around the catheter, granulation tis-
sue is present at the skin exit sinus, and purulent material
can be expressed through the exit orifice with pressure over 
the subcutaneous cuff or stroking the skin over the tunnel
toward the exit site while gently tugging on the catheter. As 
long as the infection has not extended to the deep cuff, it is 
possible to resolve the problem without losing the catheter 
or interrupting therapy. Ultrasonography of the catheter
tunnel is a useful preoperative tool to evaluate for deep cuff 
involvement, particularly in obese patients where physical
signs are often unreliable. Patients found to have infection
involving the deep cuff on ultrasonography should undergo 
catheter removal. Moreover, patients with concurrent peri-
tonitis are not candidates for catheter salvage procedures,
as peritonitis suggests that transmural spread of the infec-
tion has already occurred.
a. Unroofing–cuff shaving. Unroofing the skin and subcutane-
ous tissue overlying the infected catheter tunnel permits 
drainage of pus, debridement of granulation tissue, and
shaving of the superficial cuff. The catheter, including
the shaved tubing segment, is directed out of the medial
aspect of the incision and stabilized in this position
by securing it to the adjacent skin with sterile adhe-
sive strips. The wound is left open with performance of
wet-to-dry dressing changes (once or twice daily) with
saline-soaked gauze, and allowed to heal by secondary
intention.
Depending on the magnitude of the infection, the 
procedure can be performed in the treatment room or 
operating room under local or general anesthesia. The 
primary advantage of the unroofing–cuff shaving proce-
dure is that dialysis is not interrupted.
b. Catheter splicing.  An alternative surgical treatment
approach for chronic exit-site infection that has not
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   445 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
446
extended beyond the superficial cuff is replacement of 
the infected external tubing segment by catheter splic-
ing. This may be the preferred salvage procedure for 
a badly chosen exit-site location that was placed in an 
infection-prone area, such as within a skin crease, on the 
apex of a flabby skin fold, or under the belt line. In this 
circumstance, performing only an unroofing–cuff shav -
ing procedure may still result in an exit-site location that 
is predisposed to infection. The spliced catheter segment 
can be routed to a more stable exit-site location includ-
ing the upper abdomen or chest region. Since the proce -
dure requires more extensive dissection and tunneling, it 
is best performed in the operating room under local or 
general anesthesia.
After skin preparation, the infected exit-site is iso-
lated from the primary surgical field during draping and 
managed in the final step to prevent contamination 
of the new catheter and wound. An incision is made 
through the previous insertion site scar to expose the 
uninvolved intercuff segment of the catheter at the level 
of the fascia. The catheter is divided in the intercuff seg-
ment to preserve a 2.5-cm stump on the deep cuff side. 
A single- or double-cuff catheter with or without a pre-
formed swan neck bend may be selected for the splicing 
segment. After trimming the new catheter to appropri-
ate length, the segment is joined to the stump of the deep 
cuff end of the original catheter with a titanium connec-
tor. The external segment of the spliced catheter is tun-
neled to a suitable exit location remote from the infected 
exit site. The wound is closed and dressings are applied. 
In the final step, the external part of the old catheter is 
removed and the wound is debrided and packed open 
with saline wet-to-dry dressings. Antibiotics are contin-
ued for 2–4 weeks until the infected wound is healed. 
Peritoneal dialysis can be resumed immediately after 
the procedure.
2. Catheter infection–related peritonitis. Progression of an exit-site 
and tunnel infection to the deep cuff can lead to concur -
rent peritonitis. Rarely, peritonitis can lead to chronic deep 
cuff infection and proceed in a retrograde fashion to mani-
fest initially as a tunnel infection. Ultrasonography can
be helpful in evaluating deep cuff involvement. Catheter
infection–related peritonitis is best managed by catheter
removal. Antibiotic treatment for peritonitis is discussed
in Chapter 27. Reinsertion of the dialysis catheter can be
performed 4–6 weeks following completion of antibiotic
therapy for peritonitis.
VII. CARE OF THE CHRONIC PERITONEAL CATHETER. Postoperative manage-
ment of primarily externalized catheters will vary depending on
whether they are used immediately or if a 2-week delay is to be
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   446 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 447
prescribed to allow for wound healing and firm tissue ingrowth 
of the cuffs.
A. Catheter irrigation.  Catheters that are not used immediately 
should undergo irrigation with 1 L of solution (saline or dialy-
sate) within 72 hours following insertion to wash out blood 
and fibrinous debris. If the effluent is particularly bloody, irri-
gation is repeated until signs of clearing are evident. To assure 
patency, it is a good idea to repeat the irrigation weekly until 
such time that dialysis is instituted. Heparin added to the irri-
gant (1,000 units/L) is helpful in preventing fibrin plugging of 
the catheter during the early postoperative period.
B. Postoperative catheter immobilization and dressings.  Since no cath -
eter anchoring stitches are used, it is important to immobilize 
the catheter on the abdominal wall with medical adhesive and 
sterile adhesive strips. A nonocclusive barrier dressing of suf-
ficient size to protect the exit-site and surgical wounds and 
to further immobilize the catheter should be applied at the 
time of the placement procedure. In addition, the transfer set 
should be secured to the abdominal wall to prevent tugging 
on the catheter at the exit site. As long as the dressings are 
clean and intact and the exit site appears stable, dressings are 
changed on a weekly basis until such time that the patient is 
instructed in the protocol for chronic exit-site care. If, at any 
time, the exit site appears unstable, the frequency of exit-site 
care is modified according to the findings.
C. Long-term catheter and exit-site care.  Patients should limit them -
selves to nonstrenuous activities for 4–6 weeks following 
catheter placement to permit good wound healing. If exit-site 
healing is uneventful, most patients are able to resume show-
ering in 3–4 weeks. This usually coincides with implementa-
tion of the chronic exit-site care routine. Most exit-site care 
protocols involve daily cleansing with nonirritating, nontoxic, 
antiseptic agents and application of a prophylactic antibiotic 
ointment or cream such as mupirocin or gentamicin. Sterile 
dressings over the exit site are encouraged. Tub bathing and 
swimming with immersion of the exit site are discouraged. 
Centers that permit swimming usually restrict the activity to 
properly chlorinated private pools or ocean water. It is rec-
ommended that an ostomy appliance or similar device cover 
the exit site and catheter during swimming and to perform 
routine exit-site care after the activity. Patients should be 
reminded that the catheter is a “lifeline” and advised to con-
sider the consequences of risking exposure of their peritoneal 
access to potential contamination during swimming.
D. Embedded catheter care.  Patients who undergo catheter embed -
ment may resume showering after 48 hours. Avoidance of 
strenuous activities is required for 4–6 weeks following cath -
eter placement to permit good wound healing.
Externalization of embedded catheters is a clinic pro -
cedure performed using sterile technique in a suitable treat -
ment room under local anesthesia. If appropriate embedding 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   447 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
448
technique was performed, the catheter tubing should be eas-
ily palpable at the incision scar created during the procedure 
while the catheter was temporarily externalized at the future 
exit site. In equivocal cases, ultrasound examination can be 
employed to identify the catheter tubing at the correct dis -
tance from the superficial cuff. Care is exercised in anesthetiz-
ing the skin and making the incision to avoid damage to the 
catheter. Hemostat dissection is used to identify and deliver 
the catheter from the embedment track. The plugged end of 
the tubing is amputated, the catheter adapter is inserted, the 
transfer set is attached, and flow is tested. The catheter may 
require brisk irrigation with a 60-mL syringe and saline to dis-
lodge fibrin clots. Unsatisfactory flow should be managed as 
described under Section VI.A. Exit-site care following external-
ization of embedded catheters is the same as that described for 
primarily 
 externalized catheters.
 VIII. CATHETER REMOVAL AND SECONDARY EMBEDDING
A. Removal of acute noncuffed catheters.  Because of the concerns
for peritonitis, acute noncuffed catheters should be removed 
within 3 days. After the abdomen is drained and retaining 
sutures are removed, the catheter is gently withdrawn. It is 
recommended that the peritoneum be allowed to rest for a 
couple of days before inserting a new catheter. Insertion sites 
for replacement catheters should alternate between medial 
and lateral locations, allowing a distance of at least 2–3 cm 
from the previous site.
B. Removal of chronic catheters.  Since firm tissue ingrowth of the 
Dacron cuffs will have occurred by 2–3 weeks, chronic cath-
eters in place for a longer period will usually require removal 
by surgical dissection in the operating room or suitable pro-
cedure room, especially if the deep cuff was positioned in the 
muscle layer. Fascial defects will require suture repair to pre-
vent an abdominal wall hernia.
C. Secondary embedding of chronic catheters.  On occasion, catheter 
removal is performed because patients regain sufficient renal 
function to discontinue dialysis, but recovery is not expected 
to be permanent. An alternative to removing the catheter is 
secondary embedding. The inconvenience and cost of catheter 
maintenance can be eliminated for the interim by secondary 
embedding while still preserving a readily available perito-
neal access that can be immediately employed. This approach 
avoids complications of new catheter placement such as flow 
dysfunction and pericatheter leak, and also avoids the neces-
sity of possible future central venous catheter placement for 
urgent hemodialysis.
The procedure performed is similar to catheter splic -
ing except that the spliced external segment is embedded. 
After skin preparation, the existing exit site and catheter are 
isolated from the primary surgical field during draping and 
managed in the final step to prevent contamination of the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   448 09/10/14   1:29 am
Chapter 23 / Peritoneal Dialysis Catheters, Placement, and Care 449
spliced catheter and wounds. An incision is made through 
the previous insertion site scar to expose the intercuff seg-
ment of the catheter. The catheter is divided in the intercuff  
segment to preserve at least a 2.5-cm stump on the deep cuff  
side. A single- or double-cuff catheter with or without a pre-
formed swan neck bend may be selected for the splicing seg-
ment. After trimming the new catheter to appropriate length, 
the segment is joined to the stump of the deep cuff end of the 
former catheter with a titanium connector. The external seg -
ment of the spliced catheter is temporarily externalized at 
the new exit site and then tunneled into a subcutaneous bed, 
as described in the section on embedded catheters. After the 
wounds are closed and protected, the remaining external seg-
ment of the former catheter is removed and the old exit-site 
wound is  excised and closed.
Suggested Readings
Attaluri V , et al. Advanced laparoscopic techniques significantly improve function of 
peritoneal dialysis catheters. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;211:699–704.
Brown PA, et al. Complications and catheter survival with prolonged embedding of 
peritoneal dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2008;23:2299–2303.
Brunier G, et al. A change to radiological peritoneal dialysis catheter insertion: 
 three-month outcomes. Perit Dial Int. 2010;30:528–533.
Crabtree JH. Rescue and salvage procedures for mechanical and infectious complica-
tions of peritoneal dialysis. Int J Artif Organs. 2006;29:67–84.
Crabtree JH, Burchette RJ. Effective use of laparoscopy for long-term peritoneal dialysis 
access. Am J Surg. 2009;198:135–141.
Crabtree JH, Burchette RJ. Comparative analysis of two-piece extended peritoneal 
dialysis catheters with remote exit-site locations and conventional abdominal 
catheters. Perit Dial Int. 2010;30:46–55.
Crabtree JH, Burchette RJ. Peritoneal dialysis catheter embedment: surgical consider-
ations, expectations, and complications. Am J Surg. 2013;206:464–471.
Flanigan M, Gokal R. Peritoneal catheters and exit-site practices toward optimum peri-
toneal access: a review of current developments. Perit Dial Int. 2005;25:132–139.
Gadallah MF, et al. Peritoneoscopic versus surgical placement of peritoneal dialy-
sis catheters: a prospective randomized study on outcome. Am J Kidney Dis . 
1999;33:118–122.
Ghaffari A. Urgent-start peritoneal dialysis: a quality improvement report. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2012;59:400–408.
Gokal R, et al. Peritoneal catheters and exit-site practices toward optimum peritoneal 
access: 1998 update. Perit Dial Int. 1998;18:11–33.
Hagen SM, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the influence of perito-
neal dialysis catheter type on complication rate and catheter survival. Kidney Int. 
2014;85:920–932.
McCormick BB, et al. Use of the embedded peritoneal dialysis catheter: experience and 
results from a North American center. Kidney Int. 2006;70:538–543.
Miller M, et al. Fluoroscopic manipulation of peritoneal dialysis catheters: outcomes 
and factors associated with successful manipulation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol . 
2012;7:795–800.
Penner T, Crabtree JH. Peritoneal dialysis catheters with back exit sites. Perit Dial Int. 
2013;33:93–96.
Simons ME, et al. Fluoroscopically-guided manipulation of malfunctioning peritoneal 
dialysis catheters. Perit Dial Int. 1999;19:544–549.
Twardowski ZJ, et al. Six-year experience with swan neck presternal peritoneal dialysis 
catheter. Perit Dial Int. 1998;18:598–602.
Vaux EC, et al. Percutaneous fluoroscopically guided placement of peritoneal dialysis 
catheters—a 10-year experience. Semin Dial. 2008;21:459–465.
Xie J, et al. Coiled versus straight peritoneal dialysis catheters: a randomized controlled 
trial and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2011;58:946–955.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   449 09/10/14   1:29 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
450
Web References
PD catheter placement using ultrasound and fluoroscopic guidance. http://www 
.homebybaxter.com/how/home-therapies-institute/webinars-on-demand/pd-
catheter-placement-ultrasound.html
Percutaneous insertion of peritoneal dialysis catheters with radiological guidance 
(buried & not buried). http://ukidney.com/nephrology-videos/item/170-video-
percutaneous-insertion-of-pd-catheter
Peritoneal dialysis access—catheters and placement. http://www.homebybaxter  
.com/how/home-therapies-institute/webinars-on-demand/peritoneal-dialysis-
access-catheters.html
Peritoneal dialysis catheter insertion at the bedside. http://ukidney.com/  
nephrology-videos/item/1214-peritoneal-dialysis-catheter-insertion-at-the-
bedside
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch023.indd   450 09/10/14   1:29 am