451
Peritoneal dialysis (PD) was the first successfully used modality of 
renal replacement therapy in acute kidney injury (AKI) patients. 
However, its use progressively declined after 1970 due to the greater 
convenience of acute hemodialysis, and it is now predominantly 
practiced in developing countries because of its lower cost and mini-
mal infrastructure requirements. Recently, however, interest in using 
PD to manage selected AKI patients has been increasing (Ghaffari, 
2013b), and a meta-analysis suggests outcomes equivalent to those 
with HD (Chionh, 2010).
 I. INDICATIONS
A. Advantages. PD offers several advantages over hemodialysis 
in AKI. It is technically simple, with minimal infrastructure 
requirements and often lower cost. It may be the better option 
for the patient with difficult vascular access. Solute and water 
removal is gradual, with less potential for the development of 
disequilibrium syndrome, cardiovascular stress, and abrupt 
reductions in blood pressure. These potential benefits may, in 
turn, reduce the risk of renal and cardiac ischemia, fluid and 
electrolyte imbalance, and intracranial fluid shifts. No extra-
corporeal circulation is required, thus reducing the potential 
proinflammatory changes that can occur with the exposure 
of blood to synthetic tubing and membranes. Taken together, 
these factors could potentially be beneficial in permitting 
more rapid recovery of renal function.
Besides the classical indications (volume overload, elec -
trolyte disorders, uremic symptoms, or acid–base distur -
bances), acute PD can also be used to maintain volume control 
in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) functional class 
IV , to control hyper- or hypothermia, and to treat necrotizing 
pancreatitis with peritoneal lavage. Acute PD is increasingly 
being used in cases of advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD) 
presenting urgently with uremia or fluid overload, a scenario 
described as “urgent start PD.”
In the setting of natural disasters such as earthquakes, 
when several victims will develop AKI and when damage to 
Peritoneal Dialysis for 
the Treatment of Acute 
Kidney Injury
Daniela Ponce, André Luis Balbi, and 
Fredric O. Finkelstein
24
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   451 11/10/14   2:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
452
infrastructure make access to power, clean water, and facilities 
for water treatment challenging, PD can be an important and life-
saving renal replacement modality. Table 24.1 outlines the advan-
tages and disadvantages of PD to treat patients with AKI.
B. Limitations. PD is relatively contraindicated in patients with 
recent abdominal surgery, large abdominal hernias,  adynamic 
ileus, intra-abdominal adhesions, peritoneal fibrosis, or peri -
tonitis. Since volume and solute removal are slow and at times 
unpredictable, PD is not as safe and efficient as extracorpo-
real blood purification techniques for the treatment of certain 
emergencies, such as acute pulmonary edema, life- threatening 
hyperkalemia, and drug overdoses. The ability of PD to achieve 
adequate doses in hypercatabolic AKI has been a subject of 
controversy. Some authors have expressed concern over PD 
adequacy in these situations (Phu, 2002). However, there are 
also reports of positive outcomes associated with PD in hyper-
catabolic AKI patients, especially when intensive PD regimens 
were used (Chitalia, 2002; Ponce, 2012b).
PD increases intra-abdominal pressure, which may lead 
to impaired diaphragm mobilization, decreasing pulmonary 
compliance and ventilation, and this may cause or worsen 
respiratory failure. However, patients on PD generally maintain 
their vital capacity and respiratory volume, and PD is seldom 
the cause of ventilation impairment in patients without pulmo-
nary disease. Another possible limitation of PD in AKI is that 
Advantages Disadvantages
Simple to initiate Needs an intact peritoneal cavity 
with adequate peritoneal clearance 
capacity
Can be initiated anywhere Adequacy may be of concern in 
hypercatabolic patients
No need for highly skilled personnel May not be adequate for patients with 
severe acute pulmonary edema or life-
threatening hyperkalemia
No need for vascular access Ultrafiltration and clearance cannot be 
exactly predicted
No need for expensive equipment Infection (peritonitis) can occur
No exposure of blood to plastic The standard buffer used is lactate
No need for anticoagulation Concern about protein losses
Minimum blood loss Can aggravate hyperglycemia
Possible less negative impact on 
recovery of renal function
Can impair respiratory mechanics
May be of special benefit in selected 
patients (children, or patients with 
heart failure, hemodynamic instability, 
bleeding diathesis)
Is a form of continuous renal 
replacement therapy
Advantages and Disadvantages of Peritoneal Dialysis in 
Acute Kidney Injury24.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   452 11/10/14   2:36 am
Chapter 24 / Peritoneal Dialysis for the Treatment of Acute Kidney Injury 453
associated protein losses may aggravate malnutrition. Protein 
supplementation, either enteral or parenteral (1.5 g/kg per day) 
has been recommended for AKI patients on PD.
The high glucose concentrations in peritoneal dialysate 
may cause hyperglycemia, even in nondiabetic patients. This 
is easily correctable through intravenous, subcutaneous, 
or intraperitoneal administration of insulin. Peritonitis is a 
potential problem. Older studies reported a high frequency of 
peritonitis. However, with better catheter implantation tech -
niques, improved connectology, and automated methods, the 
incidence has been reduced and the risk is similar to the inci-
dence of infections with extracorporeal blood purification for 
AKI (Ponce, 2011a).
 II. TECHNICAL ASPECTS
A. Peritoneal access. Safe and efficient access to the peritoneal cav-
ity is a crucial factor for PD success. For many years, bedsides 
insertion of a rigid catheter using a trocar was the standard 
technique to access the peritoneal cavity for acute PD. This 
technique is still used routinely in many parts of the world, but 
its use has declined with the introduction of simple procedures 
for insertion of a flexible, cuffed Tenckhoff catheter, which pro-
vides the optimal access for PD. Depending on availability, a 
single- or double-cuff Tenckhoff catheter—either straight or 
swan neck—can be used in AKI. The advantages of a Tenckhoff 
catheter over the rigid catheter include  having a lower inci-
dence of leakage, larger-diameter lumen, and side holes result-
ing in better dialysate flow rates,  and less obstruction as well 
as a decreased incidence of peritonitis. Furthermore, the rigid 
catheters need to be removed after 3–5 days, while the flexible, 
cuffed catheters can be left in indefinitely. Thus, if the patient 
does not recover renal function, the catheter may be used for 
chronic dialysis. Of course, it may be necessary to use alterna-
tive catheters with a  rigid stylet, or even improvised options 
such as nasogastric tubes or surgical drains, in resource-poor 
environments where flexible, cuffed catheters are not avail -
able or are too costly.
Tenckhoff catheters can be inserted under local anaes -
thesia at the bedside, in a designated treatment room, or in 
a surgical theater. In a patient with previous abdominal sur -
gery, laparoscopic or open technique is preferred, and this will 
usually require an operating room and a surgeon. In patients 
without previous surgery, no method of insertion is proven 
to be superior to any other. Rather, the method of implanta-
tion should be based on local availability of skills, equipment, 
and consumables. The bedside insertion utilizes a modified 
 Seldinger approach with a guidewire and “peel-away” sheath 
and is a method practised by many nephrologists. The cath-
eter is inserted as a blind procedure and therefore this method 
should be avoided, if possible, in those patients who have a 
 midline surgical scar or history to suggest intra-  abdominal 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   453 11/10/14   2:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
454
adhesions. For details of catheter insertion mehods see 
 chapter 23.
B. PD solutions. Commercially prepared PD solutions are optimal 
because they have the advantage of minimizing the risks of 
errors in mixing fluids and of contamination, and of incorporat-
ing standardized and generally accepted connectology. Where 
these are not available because of logistical problems or costs, 
locally mixed fluids can be used, but sterile production and 
mixing of solutions as well as use of sterile connection devices 
are imperative. Such locally made PD fluids can be produced 
from physiological intravenous fluids by adding glucose and 
bicarbonate.
The composition of standard PD solutions is shown 
in Table 22.1. Other commercial intravenous solutions that 
can relatively easily be converted into dialysis fluids include 
Ringer’s lactate, Hartmann’s solutions, half normal saline, and 
Plasmalyte B. Standard PD solutions generally use lactate as a 
buffer; this is converted to bicarbonate mainly through liver 
and muscle pyruvate dehydrogenase enzymes. In critically ill 
AKI patients (such as those with shock, poor tissue perfusion 
states, liver failure, etc.), there may be impaired conversion of 
lactate to bicarbonate, which can aggravate metabolic acido-
sis. In such patients, bicarbonate-containing PD solutions may 
be preferable. However, one small study randomized 20 AKI 
patients to treatment with either lactate- or bicarbonate-based 
PD and showed that while bicarbonate PD solution allowed 
better correction of metabolic acidosis and was associated 
with better hemodynamic stability, there were no differences 
in patient outcomes when compared to standard lactate solu-
tion (Thongboonkerd, 2001).
C. PD modalities. The process of dialysate instillation and removal 
can be automated with a PD cycler. The advantage of this sys-
tem is that it can be set up by a trained staff member to reduce 
the risk of complications. It reduces nursing time as all cycles 
are automatic, and there is some suggestion that peritonitis 
is less likely. Automated cyclers have been used extensively to 
perform PD in AKI, particularly when high-volume peritoneal 
dialysis (HVPD) is used. However, in a resource-poor setting, 
cyclers may be unavailable or too expensive.
The choice of the type of PD to be utilized should be based 
on the experience of the medical and nursing team, avail-
able resources, the safety and efficacy of the technique, and 
the needs of the individual patient. An illustration of various 
techniques applicable to AKI is provided in Figure 24.1 and 
Table 24.2.
1. Intermittent PD (IPD).  This is the PD technique that histori -
cally has been most frequently used in AKI and it is still the 
most common, being routinely practiced in many parts of
the world. Patients are treated for 48–72 hours, or occa-
sionally longer, with rapid installation and drainage of
fluid and a dwell time of 30–60 minutes. A trocar-style PD
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   454 11/10/14   2:36 am
Chapter 24 / Peritoneal Dialysis for the Treatment of Acute Kidney Injury 455
catheter is traditionally used and removed after the dialysis 
treatment is completed, but Tenckhoff catheters are a bet -
ter option and are increasingly available. Since the dialysis 
is interrupted when the catheter is removed, the weekly 
small-solute clearance is limited and might be inadequate 
in hypercatabolic, critically ill AKI patients. There are no 
recent large studies addressing this issue. Modeling sug-
gests that IPD can deliver appropriate amounts of dialysis 
in a fairly broad range of clinical circumstances, depending 
on the degree of residual renal function (Guest, 2012).
2. Continuous equilibrated PD (CEPD). This type of PD is similar to 
CAPD. A dwell time from 2 to 6 hours is typical, and the 
CEPD can be performed manually or with a cycler. Several 
reports of limited number of patients successfully treated 
by this method can be found from the 1980s onward. The 
clearance of small molecules and fluid removal with this 
methodology depend on the frequency and volume of 
FIGURE 24.1 Illustration of the techniques of PD used for AKI patients. IPD, Intermittent 
PD; CEPD continuous equilibrated PD; HVPD, high volume PD; TDP , tidal PD.
IPD
CEPD
HVPD
TPD
Time (hours)
PD 
Types
Urea 
 Clearance 
(mL/min)
Dwell 
Time 
(min)
Volume/
Cycle
Total 
 Volume 
(L)
Session 
Duration 
(hr)
 Sessions 
per 
Week
Weekly 
Kt/V
IPD 12–20 30–60 2 L 30–48 24 2–5 —
CEPD 10–15 180–300 2 L 8–16 24 7 1.8–2.1
TIDAL 10–15 10–30 2 L fill 12–30 18–24 7/
duration
Variable 
cycle 
volume
HVPD 15–20 35–60 2 L 36–44 24 7 3.5–3.8
Different Types of Peritoneal Dialysis and Selected Features
24.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   455 11/10/14   2:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
456
exchanges and need to be determined based on the clinical 
status of the patient.
3. Tidal PD (TPD).  TPD is performed with a dedicated cycler.
In TPD, an initial large infusion of PD solution is followed
by drainage of a portion of the dwell volume, typically
50%–75% of the initial volume, which is then replaced with 
fresh solution, restoring the initial intraperitoneal volume
at each cycle. TPD may result in higher small-MW-solute
clearances than CEPD, though not all studies have found
this. TPD also may reduce the frequency of pain on drain-
age of dialysate from the abdomen.
4. High-volume PD (HVPD).  HVPD is a continuous modality
designed to achieve high small-MW-solute clearances. It
requires an automated cycler and a Tenckhoff catheter.
Each day the total PD solution delivered ranges from 36
to 44 L with a 30- to 50-minute dwell time. The efficacy of
HVPD has been tested in several prospective studies involv-
ing seriously ill AKI patients in Brazil. With HVPD, a weekly
Kt/V of 3.8 ± 0.6 could be delivered, and the mortality rate
was around similar to that in AKI patients treated with
intermittent or extended daily hemodialysis (Gabriel, 2008).
III. PRESCRIBING AND DOSING OF ACUTE PD.  The most appropriate pre-
scription and dose for PD in the management of patients with
AKI is poorly defined because there are only a limited number
of trials available to compare treatment modalities, the studies
that have been done have methodological flaws, and the dose of
dialysis used has varied widely (Chionh, 2010).
Where resources permit and where a cuffed catheter can be 
placed, using HVPD targeting a Kt/V urea of 0.5 daily (3.5 weekly) 
is associated with outcomes comparable to that of daily HD; 
targeting higher doses does not appear to improve outcome 
(Gabriel, 2008). A review of the literature suggests that such a 
high dose may not be necessary for many patients with AKI and 
that targeting a daily Kt /V of 0.3 (2.1 weekly) with a modified 
CEPD approach may be adequate for many patients (Cionh, 2010; 
 Ivarsen, 2013). This may be particularly helpful in developing 
countries where resources are limited, costs are critical, and AKI 
is more often caused by infections, volume contraction, obstetri-
cal problem, and so on, rather than complex postsurgical compli-
cations with multiorgan failure.
During the initial 24 hours of therapy, the cycler dwell time 
needs to be dictated by the clinical circumstances of the patient. 
Short cycle times (every 1–2 hours) with dwell volumes of 1.5 or 
2 L may be necessary to correct hyperkalemia, fluid overload, or 
metabolic acidosis. Thereafter, the cycle time can be increased 
but generally not beyond 4–6 hours. Ultrafiltration is regulated 
by adjusting the dextrose concentration of the solution and by 
shortening the cycler dwell time.
A. How to prescribe acute PD.  As the dialysis requirements of a 
patient may change from day to day, it is prudent to write PD 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   456 11/10/14   2:36 am
Chapter 24 / Peritoneal Dialysis for the Treatment of Acute Kidney Injury 457
orders for only 24 hours at a time, reassessing and altering 
the prescription as indicated. A standardized form for acute 
PD prescriptions is helpful in assuring that the specifications 
of the procedure are complete and clear for the nursing staff 
responsible for its delivery (Table 24.3).
1. Exchange volume. Choice of exchange volume is dictated pri-
marily by the size of the peritoneal cavity. An average-sized 
adult can usually tolerate 2-L exchanges, but in smaller 
patients, those with pulmonary disease, and those with 
abdominal wall or inguinal hernias, the volume should be 
reduced. Although initiating acute PD with a 2-L exchange 
A. Nursing orders
1. Dialysis to run________hours
2. Exchange volume: ________L
3. Warm dialysis fluid to 37°C
4. Exchange time: Inflow 10 minutes
Dwell________minutes
Outflow 20 minutes or as long as fluid drains freely
DO NOT LEAVE FLUID IN ABDOMEN
5. Strict intake and output to be kept on fluid intake–output record
6. Dialysate balance to be recorded on peritoneal dialysis record
7. Dialysis fluid running balance to be maintained at: ________L
8. Dialysate solution: ________%
9. Additives to dialysate:
Medication dose frequency
________ ________/2 L q exchange or ×________exchanges
________ ________/2 L q exchange or ×________exchanges
 10. Heparin: 1,000 units/2 L q exchange: yes/no
 11. Turn and position patient p.r.n. for optimum outflow
 12. Vital signs q________hours
 13. Catheter care and dressing change every day
 14. Withdraw 15 mL dialysis fluid from catheter port every morning during 
dialysis and send for cell count with differential, and culture and 
sensitivity: yes/no
B.
 Blood draw orders:
1. BUN, creatinine, HCO3, Na, K, Cl, and glucose 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. each day 
during dialysis
C. Notify physician immediately for:
1. Poor dialysate flow
2. Severe abdominal pain or distention
3. Bright red blood or cloudy dialysate drain
4. Dialysate leak or purulent drainage around catheter exit site
5. Blood pressure of <________ mm Hg systolic
6. Respiration rate of >________/minute, or severe shortness of breath
7. Temperature of >________°C
8. Two consecutive positive exchanges
9. Single positive exchange balance (dialysate-IN – dialysate-OUT) of 
≥1,000 mL
 10. If negative balance exceeds ________ L over ________ hours
BUN, blood urea nitrogen.
Acute Peritoneal Dialysis Sample Orders
24.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   457 11/10/14   2:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
458
volume is standard, some nephrologists prefer to start 
with smaller volumes (1–1.5 L) for the first few exchanges 
to minimize the risk of leaks. Otherwise, one should not 
reduce the exchange volume without good reason as 
this leads to lower clearances. In large or very catabolic 
patients, an exchange volume of 2.5–3 L may be helpful to 
augment the efficiency of dialysis.
2. Exchange time. This is the combined time required for inflow, 
dwell, and drain. If the aim is to maximize small-  solute 
clearance, the exchange time should be relatively short at 
about 1–2 hours, but in CEPD, longer times are routine.
a. Inflow time. Inflow is by gravity or hydraulically pumped 
with a cycler and usually requires about 5–10 minutes 
(200–300 mL/min). Inflow time is dictated by the volume 
to be infused and, with manual systems, the height of the 
dialysis solution above the patient’s abdomen. It may 
be prolonged due to kinking of the tubing or increased 
inflow resistance by intra-abdominal tissues in close 
proximity to the catheter tip. On initiation of acute PD, 
some patients may experience pain or cramping with 
inflow of PD solution. This may result from the hyper -
tonic and acidic nature of the PD fluid and often improve 
with time but, when severe, may be relieved by slowing 
the dialysate inflow rate for several exchanges. Other -
wise, inflow time should be kept to a minimum to maxi-
mize dialysis efficiency. Cold PD solution can result in 
discomfort and hypothermia, and so the solution should 
be warmed to 37°C before infusion.
b. Dwell time. The dwell period is the time during which the 
total exchange volume is present in the peritoneal cavity 
(i.e., the time from the end of inflow to the beginning of 
outflow). When initiating PD in acutely ill and catabolic 
patients, the usual dwell time is 30 minutes to achieve 
an exchange time of 60 minutes. With a 2-L exchange 
volume, as much as 48 L of fluid can be exchanged daily. 
Given a peritoneal membrane with average transport 
characteristics, the urea concentration in the drained 
dialysate will be approximately 50%–60% of that in the 
plasma (D/P ratio of 0.5–0.6 at 1 hour). Thus, with an 
aggressive dialysis exchange rate of 2 L/hr, the plasma 
urea clearance could approximate 24–29 L per day  
(0.5–0.6 × 48 L per day) or 168–202 L per week. If 
the patient is not very catabolic, a longer dwell time 
(e.g.,  1.5–6 hours) can often be used. With a 4-hour 
exchange time (dwell time 3.5 hours), the dialysate urea 
concentration is, on average, 90% of that in the plasma 
(D/P ratio of 0.9 at 4 hours). This leads to a plasma urea 
clearance of at least 11 L per day (0.9 × 12 L per day), or 
77 L per week. Assuming an ultrafiltration rate of 1 L per 
day, this would add 6.3 L of clearance per week, making a 
total clearance of 83 L per week. In terms of weekly Kt /V 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   458 11/10/14   2:36 am
Chapter 24 / Peritoneal Dialysis for the Treatment of Acute Kidney Injury 459
urea (see what follows), the weekly clearance of 83 L is 
the (K × t) term. For a 70-kg male patient with a V of 42 L, 
weekly (K × t)/V would be 83/42 or about 2.0.
c. Outflow time. Outflow of spent dialysate is by gravity and 
usually requires 20–30 minutes. Outflow time depends 
on the total volume to be drained, the resistance to out-
flow, and, with manual methods, the difference in height 
between the patient’s abdomen and the drainage bag. In 
many patients, particularly those with large abdomens, 
the first exchange may not drain completely (often only 
1–1.5 L is retrieved) due to initial filling of poorly drain-
ing areas of the abdomen. As long as marked abdominal 
distension is not present, a second exchange of 2 L can 
be cautiously instilled. Subsequent drainage usually pro-
ceeds normally.
3. Choosing the dialysis solution dextrose concentration
a. Standard 1.5% dextrose (glucose monohydrate).  This concen -
tration of dextrose (approximately 1,360 mg glucose/dL 
[75 mmol/L]) will, in general, exert an osmotic force suf-
ficient to remove 50–150 mL fluid/hr (although this may 
vary from patient to patient) when using a 2-L exchange 
volume and a 60-minute exchange time. This ultrafiltra-
tion rate could translate into fluid removal of 1.2–3.6 L 
per day.
b. Higher concentrations of dextrose.  Greater fluid removal 
can be achieved with higher dextrose concentrations. 
A 4.25% dextrose solution can result in an ultrafiltra-
tion rate of 300–400 mL/hr. Acutely, this degree of fluid 
removal can be required for the treatment of conges-
tive heart failure or marked volume overload. However, 
continued use of the 4.25% solution could theoretically 
result in the removal of 7.2–9.6 L per day and cause 
marked hypernatremia. In practice, this degree of fluid 
removal is rarely required. Available dextrose solutions 
(i.e., 1.5%, 2.5%, or 4.25% exchanges) can be adjusted 
to provide the level of ultrafiltration desired. Once the 
patient is euvolemic, one can resume using 1.5% solution 
for all exchanges.
4. Dialysis solution additives. When injecting any additive into 
PD solution bags, sterile technique must be followed in 
order to prevent bacterial contamination of the dialysis 
solution and peritonitis.
a. Potassium. Standard PD solutions contain no potassium 
(K). In general, after the initial exchanges, serum K 
concentrations are within the normal range, unless the 
patient is very catabolic. In fact, losses of K can be high 
in acute PD. Such removal may cause serious K depletion 
and cardiovascular instability. This can be prevented 
or corrected by adding K to the dialysis solution. When 
serum K is lower than 4 mM, K 4.0–5 mM can be added 
to the PD solutions to minimize the risk of hypokalemia.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   459 11/10/14   2:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
460
b. Heparin. Sluggish dialysate flow from catheter obstruc-
tion by fibrin or blood clots may occur in acute PD, often 
as a result of the slight bleeding that may accompany
catheter insertion or irritation of the peritoneum by
the catheter. Heparin (500–1,000 units/L) added to the
dialysis solution can be helpful in preventing or treating
this problem. Because heparin is absorbed minimally
through the peritoneum, there is no increased risk of
bleeding.
c. Insulin. Because glucose is absorbed from the dialysis
solution, supplemental insulin administration may be
required for the diabetic patient undergoing acute PD.
Insulin can be given subcutaneously or intravenously, or
regular insulin may be added to the PD solution before
infusion. The blood glucose level must be monitored
closely, and the dose of insulin tailored to the needs of
the patient.
d. Antibiotics. Intraperitoneal administration of antibiotics
is an efficient route for treating peritonitis. In general,
antibiotics should not be given intraperitoneally to treat 
systemic infections.
B. How to measure dose in acute PD. It is important to ensure that 
acute PD is delivering an adequate amount of dialysis for the 
AKI patient. Adequacy is generally assessed by measuring the 
Kt/V urea nitrogen delivered by the PD. This is done by mea-
suring the urea concentration in representative samples of 
dialysate and plasma in order to calculate a D/P ratio for urea. 
This is multiplied by the total daily dialysate drain volume and 
divided by the estimated volume of distribution of urea using 
anthropometric equations for total body water such as the 
Watson equation (see Chapter 25). However, patients with AKI 
often are fluid loaded, and urea distribution volume often will 
be considerably higher than predicted by such equations. 
MEASUREMENT OF DELIVERED Kt/V
Kt/V = clearance of urea × time
volume if distribution of urea
= mean dialysate urea nitrogen (mg/dL)
mean serum urea nitrogen (mg/dL)
× drained 24 hr volume in mL
estimated volume of distribution of urea (mL)
This is multiplied by 7 to yield the weekly Kt/V urea
I V. COMPLICATIONS. A number of problems may arise during the
course of acute PD. These include mechanical, infectious, techni-
cal, and metabolic problems.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   460 11/10/14   2:36 am
Chapter 24 / Peritoneal Dialysis for the Treatment of Acute Kidney Injury 461
A. Mechanical complications. Incomplete drainage may lead to 
“overfill, ” which is progressive intraperitoneal accumulation 
of dialysate, with attendant discomfort, distention, and even 
respiratory compromise. Catheter-related problems resulting 
in poor drainage are the main cause of this, although intra-
abdominal adhesions or bowel distention can contribute. One 
should observe the drainage cycle and make sure that the 
patient is emptying completely during the allowed drainage 
period. Mechanical problems occur in up to 10% of patients 
undergoing acute PD.
B. Peritonitis. Peritonitis rates have ranged from 4% to 41% dur -
ing acute PD treatment in different studies. This occurs most 
often after 48 hours and is more common with open- than 
with closed-drainage systems. Although infections from gram- 
positive organisms dominate, there is a high incidence of 
gram-negative or fungal-related peritonitis in acute PD. This 
may be a reflection of the severity of illness in patients requir-
ing acute PD as well as predisposing factors, such as the pro-
longed use of multiple antibiotics.
C. Hyperglycemia.  The amount of glucose absorbed during PD 
varies significantly between patients due to differences 
in peritoneal membrane permeability and the concentra -
tions of dextrose used. Fast transporters absorb glucose 
more quickly. Among patients undergoing CAPD with four 
exchanges per day, 60%–80% of the glucose instilled is 
absorbed. With more rapid exchanges, such as are used with 
automated PD, glucose absorption is reduced as the number 
of cycles is higher and dwell times are shorter. In a study of 31 
AKI patients treated with HVPD, absorption of glucose was 
about 35% of that instilled during treatment (Goes, 2013). In 
order to avoid or reduce hyperglycemia in patients treated 
with PD, glucose absorption from dialysate should be taken 
into consideration when calculating total energy intake for 
PD patients. Additionally, when hyperglycemia is detected, 
frequent blood glucose monitoring (approximately every 
6 hours) should be performed, and the intravenous (IV), 
 subcutaneous, and/or intraperitoneal (IP) administration of 
insulin should be considered. In studies of patients under -
going HVPD, glucose levels were well maintained (between 
130 and 170 mg/dL; 7.2 and 9.4 mmol/L) using both IV and 
IP insulin.
D. Hypernatremia. Due to the low sieving coefficient for sodium, 
which is related to water passage via aquaporin channels, the 
ultrafiltrate generated in PD has a sodium concentration of 
approximately 70 mmol/L. Increased losses of water associ-
ated with frequent hypertonic exchanges can therefore lead to 
hypernatremia. Intravenous replacement of losses with hypo -
tonic fluids or replacing half of the losses with 5% dextrose 
water prevents the development of hypernatremia.
E. Hypoalbuminemia.  With the frequent exchanges utilized in 
acute PD, protein loss via the dialysate can be as high as 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   461 11/10/14   2:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
462
10–20 g per day and up to twice this amount if peritonitis 
develops. Oral or parenteral hyperalimentation should be 
considered in patients for whom malnutrition is deemed a 
problem. In general, protein losses through dialysis should 
not limit the use of PD in AKI patients.
 V. INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIRED FOR “URGENT ST ART” PD.  A success -
ful urgent start PD program requires a number of components 
( Ghaffari, 2013a). First, there needs to be prompt access to Tenck-
hoff catheter placement by a surgeon or nephrologist or radiolo-
gist. Second, there needs to be a willingness of nephrologists in 
the center to alter their previous practice and consider the urgent 
start PD option in CKD patients who present acutely with ure-
mia or fluid overload. Third, there needs to be an ability to carry 
out some form of low-volume acute PD, typically delivered by a 
cycler with the patient in the supine position, in a ward setting 
for at least a few days to control acute uremia and fluid over -
load. Fourth, there needs to be a willingness and ability to train 
the patient in the PD unit on short notice once the initial clini-
cal stabilization on PD has occurred. Otherwise, an unaccept -
ably long inpatient admission waiting for a training spot would 
result. These requirements mean that an urgent PD program will 
only work with flexibility and cooperation between hospital ward 
and PD unit staff and physicians, with overall leadership from an 
enthusiastic nephrologist.
References and Suggested Readings
Arramreddy R, et al. Urgent start peritoneal dialysis: a chance for a new beginning. Am 
J Kidney Dis. 2014;63:390–395.
Asif A. Peritoneal dialysis access: related procedures by nephrologists. Semin Dial. 
2004;17:398–406.
Bai ZG, et al. Bicarbonate versus lactate solutions for acute peritoneal dialysis. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;8:CD007034.
Burdmann EA, Chakravarthi R. Peritoneal dialysis in acute kidney injury: lessons 
learned and applied. Semin Dial. 2011;24:149–156.
Chionh CY, et al. Acute peritoneal dialysis: what is the ‘adequate’ dose for acute kidney 
injury? Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25:3155–3160.
Chionh CY, et al. Use of peritoneal dialysis in AKI: a systematic review. Clin J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2013;8:1649–1660.
Chitalia VC, et al. Is peritoneal dialysis adequate for hypercatabolic acute renal failure 
in developing countries? Kidney Int. 2002;61:747–757.
Gabriel DP , et al. High volume peritoneal dialysis for acute renal failure. Perit Dial Int. 
2007;27:277–282.
Gabriel DP , et al. High volume peritoneal dialysis vs daily hemodialysis: a randomized, 
controlled trial in patients with acute kidney injury. Kidney Int. 2008;73:87–93.
George J, et al. Comparing continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration and peritoneal 
dialysis in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury: a pilot study. Perit Dial 
Int. 2012;31:422–429.
Ghaffari A, Kumar V , Guest S. Infrastructure requirements for an urgent-start perito-
neal dialysis program. Perit Dial Int. 2013a;33:611–617.
Ghaffari A, et al. PD first: peritoneal dialysis as the default transition to dialysis therapy. 
Semin Dial. 2013b;26:706–713.
Goes CR, et al. Metabolic implications of peritoneal dialysis in patients with acute 
kidney injury. Perit Dial Int. 2013;33:635–645.
Guest S, et al. Intermittent peritoneal dialysis: urea kinetic modeling and implications 
of residual kidney function. Perit Dial Int. 2012;32:142–148.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   462 11/10/14   2:36 am
Chapter 24 / Peritoneal Dialysis for the Treatment of Acute Kidney Injury 463
ISPD Guidelines: peritoneal dialysis for acute kidney injury. Perit Dial Int. 2014;34:   
494-517.
Ivarsen P , Povlsen JV . Can peritoneal dialysis be applied for unplanned initiation of 
chronic dialysis? Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014, in press.
Phu NH, et al. Hemofiltration and peritoneal dialysis in infection-associated acute 
renal failure in Vietnam. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:895–902.
Ponce D, Balbi AL. Peritoneal dialysis for acute kidney injury: a viable alternative. Perit 
Dial Int. 2011a;31:387–389.
Ponce D, et al. Different prescribed doses of high-volume peritoneal dialysis and out-
come of patients with acute kidney injury. Adv Perit Dial. 2011b;27:118–124.
Ponce D, Balbi AL, Amerling R. Advances in peritoneal dialysis in acute kidney injury. 
Blood Purif. 2012a;34:107–116.
Ponce D, et al. High volume peritoneal dialysis in acute kidney injury: indications and 
limitations. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012b;7:887–894.
Ponce D, et al. A randomized clinical trial of high volume peritoneal dialysis versus 
extended daily hemodialysis for acute kidney injury patients. Int Urol Nephrol. 
2013;45:869–879.
Thongboonkerd V , Lumlertgul D, Supajatura V . Better correction of metabolic acidosis, 
blood pressure control, and phagocytosis with bicarbonate compared to lactate 
solution in acute peritoneal dialysis. Artif Organs. 2001;25:99–108.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch024.indd   463 11/10/14   2:36 am