490
 I. PERITONITIS
A. Incidence. Peritonitis remains the Achilles’ heel of peritoneal 
dialysis (PD). Peritonitis is a “contributing factor” to 16% of 
deaths on PD. Furthermore, it is the most common cause of 
treatment failure, accounting for nearly 30% of the cases. The 
overall incidence of peritonitis in continuous ambulatory 
peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) patients during the 1980s and early 
1990s averaged 1.1–1.3 episodes per patient-year in the United 
States. With improved patient training, PD delivery systems, 
and prophylactic measures, the rate of peritonitis has fallen 
worldwide. Many centers now report a peritonitis rate of 0.2 
to 0.6 episodes per patient-year at risk, or 1 episode per 20–60 
patient-months of PD (Piraino, 2011). The introduction of 
Y-set and double-bag disconnect systems has substantially 
reduced the incidence of peritonitis, particularly episodes 
caused by gram-positive organisms (Monteon, 1998; Li, 2002). 
The same flush-before-fill methodology used in CAPD Y sets 
can also be used effectively in automated peritoneal dialysis 
(APD). Peritonitis rates with APD and CAPD are not gener -
ally different. Patients on APD going “dry” during the day 
(i.e., no daytime dwell) may have a decreased risk of infection 
compared with those with a day dwell. The current Interna-
tional Society for  Peritoneal Dialysis recommendations on 
PD-related infections (Piraino, 2011) state that every program 
should monitor infection rates, ideally once a month, but, at a 
minimum, on a yearly basis.
B. Pathogenesis
1. Pathways of infection
a. Intraluminal. Peritonitis occurs most often because of
errors in technique in making or breaking a transfer
set–to-bag or catheter-to–transfer set connection. This
allows bacteria to gain access to the peritoneal cavity via 
the catheter lumen. Typically, the organisms involved are 
coagulase-negative staphylococci or diphtheroids.
b. Periluminal. Bacteria present on the skin surface can enter 
the peritoneal cavity via the peritoneal catheter tract.
Peritonitis and Exit-Site 
Infection
Cheuk-Chun Szeto, Philip K.-T. Li, and 
David J. Leehey
27
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   490 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 491
Typically, the organisms involved are  Staphylococcus 
aureus or Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
c. Bowel source. Bacteria of intestinal origin can enter the
peritoneal cavity by migrating across the bowel wall.
This is the usual mechanism of peritonitis episodes
associated with diarrheal states and/or instrumenta-
tion of the colon, and may also be seen with strangulated 
 hernia. Typical organisms involved are Escherichia coli
and Klebsiella sp.
d. Hematogenous. Less commonly, peritonitis is due to
 bacteria that have seeded the peritoneum from a distant 
site by way of the bloodstream. Typical organisms here
are streptococci and staphylococci.
e. Transvaginal. This is uncommon, but ascending infection 
may occur from the vagina via the uterine tubes into the 
peritoneum. Some Candida peritonitis may occur by this
route.
2. Role of host defenses.  The peritoneal leukocytes are critical
in combating bacteria that have entered the peritoneal
space by any of the routes already mentioned. A number of 
factors are now known to alter their efficacy in phagocytiz-
ing and killing invading bacteria.
a. Dialysis solution pH and osmolality.  Standard PD solutions
have a pH around 5 and an osmolality ranging from 1.3
to 1.8 times that of normal plasma, depending on the
glucose concentration used. These unphysiologic condi-
tions may inhibit the ability of peritoneal leukocytes to
phagocytize and kill bacteria. High osmolality, low pH,
and the presence of the lactate anion combine to cause
inhibition of superoxide. There is now some evidence
that newer normal pH, “biocompatible” solutions may
reduce the peritonitis rate, but this has not been a con-
sistent finding among published studies (Cho, 2014).
b. Peritoneal dialysis solution calcium levels.  The antimicro -
bial actions of peritoneal macrophages are enhanced by
both calcium and cholecalciferol. Use of active vitamin
D has been reported to reduce the rate of peritonitis
 (Kerschbaum, 2013). Use of a 1.25-mM (2.5-mEq/L) cal-
cium concentration in PD solution has gained popularity 
as it may improve adynamic bone disease and reduce vas-
cular calcification. An increased risk of Staphylococcus 
epidermidis peritonitis has been reported with the use
of low-calcium dialysis solutions (Piraino, 1992), but no
subsequent confirmatory reports have been published.
C. Etiology. Using appropriate culture techniques, an organism 
can be isolated from the peritoneal fluid in over 90% of cases 
in which symptoms and signs of peritonitis and an elevated 
peritoneal fluid neutrophil count are present. The responsible 
pathogen is usually a bacterium, but fungal peritonitis occurs 
occasionally (Table 27.1).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   491 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
492
Frequency of Organisms Isolated in Patients with Peritonitis
27.1
TABLE
Organisms Identified Percentage(%)
Gram-positive organisms 40–50
S. aureus
Coagulase-negative staphylococcal species
11–12
12–30
Gram-negative organisms 20–30
Pseudomonas sp.
E. coli
12–15
6–10
Fungi 2–4
Mycobacterium ~1
Polymicrobial growth ~10
Culture-negative ~15
D. Diagnosis. A t least two of the following three findings should 
be present: (a) symptoms and signs of peritoneal inflamma -
tion, (b) cloudy peritoneal fluid with an elevated peritoneal 
fluid cell count (>100/mcL) due predominantly (>50%) to 
neutrophils, and (c) demonstration of bacteria in the perito-
neal effluent by Gram stain or culture.
1. Symptoms and signs. T he most common symptom is abdomi -
nal pain, but this is sometimes very mild. Others are nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea (Table 27.2). Sometimes, especially 
in the elderly, the only symptoms are a relatively sudden 
loss of residual renal function and postural hypotension. 
On the other hand, abdominal pain can be present in di-
alysis patients owing to nonperitonitis-related abdominal 
causes; in those starting dialysis after a failed transplant in 
whom steroid treatment has been stopped, abdominal pain 
due to adrenal insufficiency should be considered.
2. Peritoneal fluid
a. Cloudiness of the fluid.  T he peritoneal fluid generally 
becomes cloudy when the cell count exceeds 50–100/
mcL (50–100 × 10 6/L). In most patients, sudden onset 
of cloudy fluid with appropriate abdominal symptoms 
is sufficient evidence of peritonitis to warrant initiation 
of antimicrobial therapy. However, cloudy peritoneal 
fluid may be due to other factors (e.g., fibrin, blood, or, 
rarely, malignancy or chyle) rather than to an increase 
in the white blood cell (WBC) count. Occasionally, fluid 
drained after a prolonged dwell period (such as after the 
daytime dwell in APD patients) appears cloudy in the 
absence of peritonitis. Conversely, a relatively translu -
cent peritoneal fluid does not completely exclude peri -
tonitis. Cloudy fluid has been reported with the use of 
calcium channel blockers, presumably because they 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   492 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 493
increase triglyceride concentration in the peritoneal 
fluid (Ram, 2012).
b. Importance of performing a differential count of peritoneal fluid
cells. Peritonitis is usually associated with an increase
in the absolute number and percentage of neutrophils
in the peritoneal fluid. On some occasions, a high peri-
toneal fluid cell count causing cloudy fluid will be pres-
ent owing to an increase in the number of peritoneal
fluid monocytes or eosinophils (see what follows). Most 
such cases are not associated with peritonitis and do
not require antimicrobial treatment. For this reason,
one should perform a differential cell count on the peri -
toneal fluid sample. Prior to counting, the fluid is spun
in a special centrifuge (e.g., Cytospin, Shandon, Inc.,
Pittsburgh, PA) and the sediment colored with Wright
stain.
c. Obtaining the specimen
1. CAPD patients. After disconnecting the drain bag full of 
peritoneal effluent, the bag is inverted several times
to mix its contents. A sample (7 mL) is aspirated from 
the port of the drain bag and transferred to a tube con-
taining ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA).
2. APD patients.  A representative cell count can be
obtained easily from the daytime dwell by first drain -
ing the abdomen and taking the sample from the
drainage bag. In those who are “day dry, ” there may be
some residual fluid present in the abdomen at the time
the patient is seen. In these cases, the peritoneal fluid
sample can be obtained directly via the peritoneal
catheter. After careful cleaning of the catheter with
Symptoms and Signs of Peritonitis
27.2
TABLE
Percentage(%)
Symptoms
Abdominal pain
Nausea and vomiting
Feverish sensation
Chills
Constipation or diarrhea
95
30
30
20
15
Signs
Cloudy peritoneal fluid
Abdominal tenderness
Rebound tenderness
Increased temperature
Blood leukocytosis
99
80
10–50
a
33
25
a Highly variable, depending on the severity of infection and the amount of time elapsed between 
onset and medical evaluation.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   493 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
494
povidone–iodine, a syringe is attached using meticu-
lous sterile technique, and 2–3 mL of fluid in the 
catheter lumen is withdrawn and discarded. The peri-
toneal fluid sample (7 mL) is then withdrawn from the 
catheter using a second syringe. The sample is injected 
into a tube containing EDTA. If insufficient fluid is 
obtained in this manner, one can infuse 1 L or more 
of dialysis solution and drain the abdomen, obtain -
ing a sample from the effluent. Although the absolute 
peritoneal fluid cell count will be lower in this diluted 
specimen, the differential count will be similar to that 
in a sample obtained directly via the catheter.
3. Storage time. M orphologic identification of the various 
cell types can become quite difficult in effluent sam-
ples stored for more than 3–5 hours prior to injection 
into the EDTA-containing sample tube.
d. Peritoneal fluid cell counts in peritonitis.  T he absolute peri -
toneal fluid cell count in CAPD patients is usually <50 
and often <10 cells/mcL. In “day dry” APD patients, 
the normal cell count may be much higher, especially 
in specimens taken directly via the catheter when the 
peritoneal fluid volume is small. Normally, the perito -
neal white cells are mainly mononuclear (monocytes, 
macrophages, and occasional lymphocytes), and the 
percentage of neutrophils does not exceed 15%. A value 
>50% suggests peritonitis, while a value >35% should 
raise suspicion. The percentage of neutrophils is raised 
in fungal and even tuberculous peritonitis as well as in 
the more common bacterial peritonitis.
The percentage of neutrophils in the peritoneal fluid 
is occasionally elevated in the absence of peritonitis—
in patients with infectious diarrhea or active colitis (or 
appendicitis or diverticulitis), in those with pelvic inflam-
matory disease, and in women who are menstruating or 
ovulating or who have recently had a pelvic examination.
e. Peritoneal fluid monocytosis.  I f there is persistent perito -
neal fluid monocytosis or lymphocytosis, tuberculous 
peritonitis should be considered. Peritoneal fluid mono -
cytosis may also occur in conjunction with peritoneal 
fluid eosinophilia.
f. Peritoneal fluid eosinophilia.  T he peritoneal fluid eosino -
phil count may become elevated in PD patients, caus-
ing cloudy fluid and leading to a suspicion of peritonitis 
(Humayun, 1981). Usually, the peritoneal fluid mono-
cyte count is also elevated. Peritoneal fluid eosinophilia 
occurs most often soon after peritoneal catheter inser -
tion. It may be seen in the sterile peritonitis that can 
occasionally occur in those patients who have initiated 
treatment with icodextrin PD solution. The irritant effect 
of peritoneal air (e.g., introduced at time of laparotomy) 
and possibly of plasticizers leached into the peritoneum 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   494 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 495
from PD solution containers and tubings is another sus -
pected cause. In such cases, the eosinophilia most often 
resolves spontaneously within 2–6 weeks. Peritoneal 
fluid eosinophilia can also occur uncommonly during 
the treatment phase of peritonitis. There have been sev-
eral case reports of its occurrence in association with 
fungal and parasitic infections of the peritoneum.
g. Culture of peritoneal fluid. T he incidence of positive perito-
neal fluid cultures in patients suspected of having peri-
tonitis depends on culture technique. Culture-negative 
peritonitis should not be >20% of episodes.
1. Storage. P eritoneal fluid should be cultured promptly; 
however, infected fluid kept at room temperature 
or refrigerated for a period often grows pathogenic 
organisms on subsequent culture. If immediate deliv-
ery to the laboratory is not possible, the inoculated 
culture bottles should ideally be incubated at 37°C.
2. Sample volume.  T he volume of peritoneal fluid sent 
for culture should be at least 50 mL as larger volumes 
increase the likelihood of a positive culture.
3. Sample preparation.  T he aliquot is centrifuged (e.g., 
at 3,000 g for 15 minutes) to concentrate the organ-
isms. The supernatant is decanted off, and the pellet 
resuspended in 3–5 mL of sterile saline and inocu-
lated into standard blood culture media (aerobic and 
anaerobic). Rapid culture techniques (e.g., Septi-chek, 
BACTEC) may be utilized.
4. Yield of positive cultures.  S eventy to ninety percent of 
dialysate samples taken from patients with clinical 
peritonitis yield positive cultures for a specific organ-
ism within 24–48 hours. More time may be needed for 
more fastidious organisms.
5. Improving culture yield.  T his may be done by hypotonic 
lysis. The centrifuged sediment is resuspended in 100 
mL of sterile water to induce lysis of its cellular ele-
ments. This may lead to release of bacteria from neu-
trophils and increase the chance of a positive culture, 
even in patients who have already received antibiotics.
6. Incidence of false-positive results. W ith very sensitive cul-
ture techniques, about 7% of cultures may be positive 
in patients without clinical peritonitis. The signifi-
cance of this is unclear.
h. Gram stain.  G ram stain of the peritoneal fluid sediment 
is useful but positive in less than half of cases of culture-
proven peritonitis. Gram stain is also useful for making 
the diagnosis of fungal peritonitis. Staining with fluores-
cent acridine orange dye has been reported to increase 
the visibility of bacterial organisms.
i. Necessity of performing blood cultures.  R outine blood cul -
tures are not necessary unless a patient appears septic 
or an acute surgical abdominal condition is suspected.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   495 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
496
E. Treatment
1. Initial management
a. Choice of antimicrobial therapy.  Empiric antibiotics must
cover both gram-positive and gram-negative organisms.
Vancomycin or a first-generation cephalosporin such as
cefazolin or cephalothin is used in combination with an
antibiotic such as ceftazidime or an aminoglycoside. In
general, a center-specific selection of empiric therapy,
dependent on the local history of sensitivities of organ -
isms causing peritonitis, is recommended.
1. Gram-positive. First-generation cephalosporins (e.g.,
cefazolin) are often preferred to vancomycin because
of the emergence of vancomycin-resistant organ-
isms. Intraperitoneal (IP) cefazolin can be conve -
niently administered in a single daily dose of 15 mg/
kg, although a 25% increase in dose is recommended
in patients with substantial residual renal function
(Manley, 1999). Alternatives to vancomycin include
nafcillin and clindamycin. Vancomycin can be used
as first-line treatment or reserved for patients har -
boring β-lactam–resistant organisms, especially
 methicillin-resistant S. aureus  (MRSA), or with peni-
cillin/cephalosporin allergy. Ciprofloxacin alone is
not recommended for gram-positive infections.
2. Gram-negative or indeterminate. Gram stain is usually not 
diagnostic, and so gram-negative organisms need to
be covered by a third-generation cephalosporin or
aminoglycoside. In theory, aminoglycosides should
be avoided if possible in patients with residual renal
function because of their nephrotoxicity (Shemin,
1999), although short courses of aminoglycosides
probably do not harm residual renal function (Lui,
2005). Aminoglycosides may be used in patients with-
out residual renal function, although one still must be 
wary of otovestibular toxicity. Table 27.3 lists sample
prescriptions based on the use of cefazolin in combi-
nation with ceftazidime.
b. Delivery methods and schedules for antimicrobial drugs
1. IP versus oral (PO) or intravenous (IV) antimicrobial therapy. IP
administration of antibiotics is preferred to IV or PO
dosing for treating peritonitis. IV antibiotics, how -
ever, should be used when there is clinical evidence of 
 systemic sepsis.
2. The loading dose.  A loading dose of antimicrobials is
usually given IP when CAPD is the treatment  modality 
(Table 27.4). If a patient appears toxic, an IV load-
ing dose should be used. For aminoglycosides, the
IV loading dose is usually gentamicin or tobramycin
1.5 mg/kg or amikacin 5 mg/kg. If a patient is in sub-
stantial pain and cannot tolerate the usual exchange
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   496 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 497
Sample Prescriptions for Initial Treatment of Peritonitis with 
Unknown Organism Type27.3
TABLE
CAPD (continuous dosing method)
1. Drain abdomen and obtain cell count and culture from drainage bag. Change 
the transfer set.
2. Loading dose: Infuse 2-L dialysis solution containing 1,000 mg ceftazidime, 1,000 
mg cefazolin, and 1,000 units heparin.
3. Allow to dwell 3–4 hr. In patients who appear septic, administer loading doses 
IV rather than IP.
4. Continue regular CAPD schedule, using normal exchange volume if tolerated. 
Add 125 mg/L ceftazidime, 125 mg/L cefazolin, and 500–1,000 units/L heparin to 
each dialysis solution bag.
CAPD (intermittent dosing method)
1. Drain abdomen and obtain cell count and culture from drainage bag. Change 
the transfer set.
2. Loading dose: same as the continuous dosing method.
3. Continue regular CAPD schedule, using normal exchange volume if tolerated. 
Administer ceftazidime 1,000 mg and cefazolin 1,000 mg into each nocturnal 
exchange. If fibrin or blood in dialysate, add heparin to every exchange.
APD: see text.
volume, the IP loading dose can be administered in a 
smaller volume of dialysis solution (e.g., 1 L). For APD 
patients, the loading dose can be given IV , but it can 
also be instilled via a peritoneal dwell that is then left 
in place for at least 4–6 hours.
3. Maintenance antimicrobial dose.  A fter the loading dose 
has been given, a CAPD or APD schedule is continued, 
with maintenance doses of antimicrobials added to 
each exchange (Table 27.4). Some centers switch APD 
patients to CAPD, but this is not routine. Maintenance 
antibiotics in CAPD patients can be administered as 
an intermittent dose once daily. For patients on an 
APD schedule, antibiotics can be administered con -
veniently in the daytime dwell. For patients on a day 
dry APD schedule, temporary conversion to a CAPD 
regimen may be considered because of ease of anti-
biotic administration, or, alternatively, a low-volume 
daytime dwell (e.g., 1 L) could be temporarily added. 
Because of increased cycler clearance of antibiotics, 
doses need to be higher in patients who remain on 
APD during the treatment of peritonitis (Manley  and 
Bailie, 2002). (Examples are given in Table 27.5.)
4. Antimicrobial dosing guidelines.  Suggested loading and 
maintenance doses for a number of antimicrobial 
drugs are listed in Table 27.4. For maintenance doses 
added to the dialysis solution, continuous and inter -
mittent dosing of antibiotics are equally efficacious. 
For continuous dosing, the same dose of antibiotic 
is added to each dialysis solution bag. Alternatively, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   497 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
498
Loading and Maintenance Doses of Antimicrobials for 
 Peritonitis (CAPD)a
27.4
TABLE
Intermittent  
(per  exchange, once daily)
Continuous  
(mg/L, all exchanges)
Aminoglycosides
Amikacin 2 mg/kg LD 25, MD 12
Gentamicin, netilmicin, 
or tobramycin
0.6 mg/kg LD 8, MD 4
Cephalosporins
Cefazolin, cephalothin,  
or cephradine
15 mg/kg LD 500, MD 125
Cefepime 1,000 mg LD 500, MD 125
Ceftazidime 1,000–1,500 mg LD 500, MD 125
Penicillins
Ampicillin, oxacillin,  
or nafcillin
ND MD 125
Amoxicillin ND LD 250–500, MD 50
Penicillin G ND LD 50,000 units, MD 
25,000 units
Quinolones
Ciprofloxacin ND LD 50, MD 25
Others
Vancomycin 15–30 mg/kg every 5–7 d LD 1,000, MD 25
Daptomycin ND LD 100, MD 20
Linezolid Oral 200–300 mg q. d.
Antifungals
Fluconazole 200 mg IP every 24–48 hr
Amphotericin NA 1.5
Combinations
Ampicillin–Sulbactam 2 g every 12 hr LD 1,000, MD 100
Trimethoprim–
Sulfamethoxazole
160 mg/800 mg oral twice daily
Imipenem–Cilastin 1 g b. i. d. LD 250, MD 50
b. i. d., two times per day; LD, loading dose in mg; MD, maintenance dose in mg; NA, not 
 applicable; ND, no data.
a Dosing of drugs with renal clearance in patients with residual renal function (defined as >100 mL 
per day urine output): dose should be empirically increased by 25%.
Adapted from Li et al. Peritoneal dialysis related infections recommendations: 2010 update.  
Perit Dial Int. 2010;30:393–423.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   498 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 499
a larger dose is added to one bag only, every 12 or 24 
hours (or, in the case of vancomycin, every 4–5 days). 
A  randomized trial in children showed that inter -
mittent vancomycin was as effective as continuous 
vancomycin (Schaefer, 1999). Single daily dosing of 
aminoglycosides has several advantages, including 
ease of administration, increased efficacy, and poten -
tially less toxicity. Increased bacterial killing rates 
associated with prolonged postantibiotic effect are 
obtained using once-daily dosing. However, trough 
concentrations of antibiotic (i.e., 24 hours after a 
dose) will be low, and the exact duration of the post -
antibiotic effect is unknown, which has led to some 
concern about the advisability of this type of regimen, 
especially in patients with residual renal function 
(Low, 1996).
There has been interest in once-daily cephalo-
sporin dosing. Cefazolin at 1–2 g IP daily has been 
tried (Lai, 1997; Troidle, 1997). However, IP cephalo-
sporin levels may fall below the minimum inhibitory 
concentration (MIC) of most organisms. As there is 
no postantibiotic effect with cephalosporins, in con-
trast to aminoglycosides, there is some concern that 
once-daily dosing may lead to more treatment failures 
than intermittent dosing (Fielding, 2002). In general, 
continuous dosing of cephalosporins is preferred, but 
intermittent dosing is also widely used.
5. Stability of antibiotics in dialysate.  V ancomycin, amino -
glycosides, and cephalosporins can be mixed in the 
same dialysis solution bag; however, aminoglycosides 
are incompatible with penicillins. Vancomycin (25 
mg/L) is stable for 28 days in dialysis solution stored 
at room temperature, although high ambient temper-
atures will reduce the duration of stability. Gentamicin 
Intermittent Dosing of Antibiotics in Automated Peritoneal 
Dialysis (APD)27.5
TABLE
Drug IP dose
Vancomycin Loading dose 30 mg/kg IP in long dwell, repeat dosing 15 mg/
kg IP in long dwell every 3–5 d (aim to keep serum trough 
levels above 15 mcg/mL)
Cefazolin 20 mg/kg IP every day, in long day dwell
Tobramycin Loading dose 1.5 mg/kg IP in long dwell, then 0.5 mg/kg IP 
each day in long dwell
Fluconazole 200 mg IP in one exchange per d every 24–48 hr
Cefepime 1 g IP in one exchange per d
Adapted from Li et al. Peritoneal dialysisrelated infections recommendations: 2010 update (2010).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   499 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
500
(8 mg/L) is stable for 14 days, but the duration of sta-
bility is reduced by the admixture of heparin. Cefazo -
lin (500 mg/L) is stable for at least 8 days at room 
temperature or for 14 days if refrigerated; addition 
of heparin does not impair stability. Ceftazidime is 
less stable; concentrations of 125 mg/L are stable for 
4 days at room temperature or 7 days if refrigerated, 
and concentrations of 200 mg/L are stable for 10 days 
if refrigerated.
c. Heparin. P eritonitis is often associated with formation 
of fibrinous clots in the peritoneal fluid, and the risk of 
catheter obstruction is high. Most centers add heparin 
(500–1,000 units/L) to the dialysis solution until perito-
nitis resolves and fibrinous clots are no longer visible in 
the effluent.
d. Nystatin. Si nce the majority of fungal peritonitis episodes 
are preceded by courses of antibiotics, fungal prophy-
laxis during antibiotic therapy may prevent some cases 
of Candida peritonitis in programs that have high rates 
of fungal peritonitis. A number of studies have examined 
the use of oral nystatin prophylaxis, given during antibi-
otic therapy, to prevent fungal peritonitis, and the results 
are mixed. We believe nystatin prophylaxis should be 
considered in programs with high baseline rates of fun-
gal peritonitis.
e. Alterations in schedule for CAPD and APD. C APD patients can 
generally continue their normal schedule of exchanges, 
unless ultrafiltration becomes inadequate. Some cen -
ters prefer to treat moderate-to-severe peritonitis in 
both CAPD and APD patients for the initial 24–48 hours 
with a series of 3–4 hour exchanges containing antibi-
otics administered via a cycler. In APD patients with 
mild-to-moderate peritonitis, the usual APD schedule 
can be continued unchanged with antibiotics admin-
istered either continuously (added to all exchanges) or 
intermittently (added only to the daytime dwell). Some 
convert the patient to CAPD but this may be a problem 
for patients, especially if they are being treated at home. 
Doses of antimicrobials for those who remain on APD 
are provided in Table 27.5. The decision to hospitalize a 
patient depends on a variety of factors, including patient 
reliability, severity of peritonitis, and the treatment 
schedule chosen. In most centers, the majority of cases 
are now managed as outpatients.
f. Consideration of secondary peritonitis.  I n a small but sig-
nificant proportion of patients with peritonitis, a seri -
ous, underlying intra-abdominal disease process (e.g., 
perforated peptic ulcer, pancreatitis, appendicitis, or 
diverticulitis) may be present. The presence of peritoneal 
fluid in the abdomen may mask the local tenderness 
commonly associated with some of these conditions. If 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   500 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 501
there is any suspicion of an underlying intra-abdominal 
disease process, a chest radiograph should be obtained. 
The presence of free IP air on upright chest radiograph 
is an unusual finding in CAPD patients, provided recent 
laparotomy or transfer set change has not been per -
formed, and may suggest the presence of a perforated 
viscus. However, free IP air may occur more commonly 
in patients being treated with cyclers.
g. Amylase and lipase. I n a dialysis patient suspected of hav-
ing pancreatitis, the finding of a serum total amylase 
value in excess of three times the upper limit of normal 
suggests that pancreatitis is present. Very severe pancre-
atitis can be present in dialysis patients with only slight, 
and therefore nondiagnostic, elevations in the serum 
total amylase level. The peritoneal fluid amylase con -
centration, easily obtainable in patients receiving PD, is 
not a sensitive indicator of pancreatitis because the peri-
toneal fluid amylase levels can be only slightly elevated 
in the presence of severe pancreatitis. Nevertheless, an 
effluent amylase level >100 units/dL is suggestive of 
pancreatitis or some other intra-abdominal catastrophe.
Serum lipase activity is elevated (as high as twice the 
upper limit of normal) in about 50% of dialysis patients. 
In PD patients using icodextrin-based PD solutions, mea-
surement of lipase is superior to amylase for diagnosis of 
acute pancreatitis.
h. Consequence of changes in peritoneal permeability . During 
peritonitis, the permeability of the peritoneum to water, 
glucose, and proteins is increased. Rapid glucose absorp-
tion from the dialysis solution reduces the amount of 
ultrafiltration and can result in fluid overload. Higher 
dialysis solution glucose levels and shorter dwell times 
may be needed to maintain adequate ultrafiltration. 
Because glucose absorption is more rapid during perito-
nitis, hyperglycemia may result and can be severe in dia-
betic patients unless glucose values are monitored and 
insulin doses titrated. Protein losses during peritonitis 
are temporarily increased.
i. Constipation. C onstipation is a common complaint dur -
ing peritonitis episodes, and constipation may itself be 
a risk factor for developing peritonitis, in addition to its 
impact on poor drainage of instilled dialysate. If consti-
pation is present, calcium-containing phosphate bind -
ers, which can cause or worsen constipation, should be 
temporarily discontinued.
2. Initial management of peritoneal contamination without peritoni -
tis. A fter bacterial contamination of the peritoneal cav-
ity, the incubation period for most organisms is about 
12–48 hours. If a break in sterile technique has occurred, 
it is advisable to institute antimicrobial therapy promptly 
in order to prevent peritonitis. The transfer set should be 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   501 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
502
changed, and the peritoneal cavity flushed with dialysis so-
lution containing an antistaphylococcal antibiotic. A short 
(1- to 2-day) course of oral antimicrobial therapy (e.g., cip-
rofloxacin) may also be given. However, there is no docu-
mentation that these procedures are effective in preventing 
peritonitis.
3. Change in management of peritonitis based on patient course and
initial culture results.  With effective treatment, the patient
should begin to improve clinically within 12–48 hours,
and the total cell count and percentage of neutrophils in
the peritoneal fluid should begin to decrease. Often visual
inspection of the effluent will suffice, but if there is no im-
provement within 48 hours, repeat cell count and culture
are necessary. Isolation of causative bacteria and determi-
nation of their antimicrobial sensitivity can generally be
obtained within 2–3 days. Longer growth periods may be
needed for certain fastidious organisms (e.g., gentamicin- 
and methicillin-resistant S. aureus ). A single organism is
isolated in 70%–90% of cases (Table 27.1).
a. Gram-positive organism cultured. If S. aureus, S. epidermidis, 
or a Streptococcus sp. is identified, then continued ther -
apy with a single antimicrobial agent is recommended.
If an aminoglycoside was given initially, it can now be
stopped. Many S. epidermidis–like organisms reported to 
be resistant to first-generation cephalosporins are sensi-
tive to the levels achieved in the peritoneal cavity. Thus,
if the patient is clinically responding to treatment, there
is usually no need to change the antibiotic regimen. If an 
Enterococcus sp. is cultured, ampicillin or vancomycin
plus an aminoglycoside is generally employed, unless
sensitivity testing indicates vancomycin resistance,
in which case linezolid or quinupristin/dalfopristin is
needed.
1. Duration of therapy. For coagulase-negative Staphylococ-
cus and Enterococcus  peritonitis, if patient improve -
ment is prompt, antimicrobial therapy should be
continued for a total of 14 days. S. aureus  peritonitis
requires antimicrobials for 3 weeks, and rifampin
could be considered an adjunct for the prevention
of relapse or repeat S. aureus  peritonitis. Rifampin
induces cytochrome P450 (CYP3A4), which should be
kept in mind when the patient is taking other medi-
cations metabolized by this pathway. S. aureus  peri -
tonitis with concurrent exit-site or tunnel infection is
unlikely to respond to antibiotic therapy without cath-
eter removal.
2. Nasal carriage and S. aureus infection.  Patients who
develop S. aureus  peritonitis are usually nasal car -
riers of this organism. Eradication of nasal carriage
may help prevent further peritoneal infections by
this bacterium. This can be accomplished with
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   502 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 503
intranasal mupirocin (bid for 5 days every 4 weeks) or 
oral rifampin (300 mg bid for 5 days every 3 months). 
Resistance to mupirocin and rifampin is increasingly 
common. Eradication of the carrier state should be 
documented by repeating appropriate cultures after 
antibacterial treatment.
b. Gram-negative organism cultured.  Recovery of a gram-
negative organism, even in a patient who is improving
clinically, has several important implications: (a) gram-
negative infections (especially Pseudomonas sp.) are hard 
to eradicate, and the risk of relapsing peritonitis is high,
(b) gram-negative peritonitis may be a sign of unsus-
pected intra-abdominal pathology, and (c) prolonged
treatment with aminoglycosides carries the risk of oto-
vestibular toxicity.
If a single, non-Pseudomonas sp. is recovered, the peri-
tonitis can usually be treated by continuation of the ini -
tial IP third-generation cephalosporin or aminoglycoside 
alone, or by another single appropriate antibiotic, although 
some centers prefer to use two agents. If a Pseudomonas sp. 
is recovered, two antibiotics are mandatory. Usually, the 
IP aminoglycoside should be continued with the addition 
of a third-generation cephalosporin administered IP or a 
semisynthetic penicillin with anti-Pseudomonas  activity 
(e.g., piperacillin) administered IV . Semisynthetic penicil-
lins can inactivate aminoglycosides in vitro, and IP coad-
ministration should be avoided. Other alternatives are 
ciprofloxacin (or another quinolone), aztreonam, imipe-
nem, and trimethoprim–
 sulfamethoxazole. Pseudomonas 
peritonitis requires catheter removal in up to two-thirds 
of cases (Bunke, 1995). Fluoroquinolones (such as cipro-
floxacin and ofloxacin) have the advantage that effective 
dialysate levels can usually be achieved after PO dosing; 
their concurrent administration with phosphate-binding 
antacids should be avoided to ensure adequate absorption 
from the gastrointestinal tract.
1. Duration of therapy.  In uncomplicated cases, duration
of therapy for gram-negative peritonitis is at least 2
and preferably 3 weeks. If the peritoneal catheter is
removed, appropriate antibiotics should be continued 
(either PO or IV) for another 2 weeks, especially with
Pseudomonas.
2. IP aminoglycoside toxicity.  To treat gram-negative peri-
tonitis, a prolonged course (2 weeks) of aminoglyco-
sides may be required. In the usual dosing strategy
(after the loading dose), 4–6 mg/L of gentamicin,
tobramycin, or netilmicin is added to the PD solution. 
This results in constant serum drug levels, which may 
cause otovestibular toxicity. Adding a higher dose
to a single bag only every 24 hours (e.g., 20 mg/L of
gentamicin or tobramycin) avoids constant serum
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   503 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
504
levels above 2 mg/L and may reduce the toxicity of IP 
aminoglycosides.
3. Alternative agents.  M any gram-negative organisms are 
sensitive to aztreonam, newer cephalosporins, qui-
nolones, imipenem, or the semisynthetic penicillins. 
Use of these alternative agents should be considered 
both initially and when prolonged therapy of gram-
negative peritonitis is required.
4. Infection with Stenotrophomonas (formerly Xanthomonas) 
sp. T he major risk factor for infection with Stenotro -
phomonas maltophilia is the previous use of broad-
spectrum antibiotics. These are usually very resistant 
organisms. Medical therapy requires two antibiot -
ics, usually including cotrimoxazole, and must be 
extended to a minimum of 3–4 weeks, and catheter 
removal is usually required (Szeto, 1997).
c. Polymicrobial peritonitis. I n general, peritonitis due to mul -
tiple gram-positive organisms will respond to antibiotic 
therapy. About 60% of these infections resolve without 
catheter removal (Szeto, 2002b).
In contrast, if multiple enteric organisms are grown, 
particularly in association with anaerobic bacteria, the 
presence of an intra-abdominal abscess or a perforated 
abdominal viscus must be considered. Perforated diver -
ticulum, tubo-ovarian abscess, cholecystitis, appen-
dicitis, perforated ulcer, and pancreatitis must all be 
included in the differential diagnosis. The risk of mor -
tality is increased (Kern, 2002). Initial management can 
be accomplished by triple-antibiotic therapy aimed at 
gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic organisms. 
Use of an IP aminoglycoside, IP vancomycin, and PO or 
IV metronidazole is usual. A surgical evaluation should 
be obtained, and management must be individualized.
d. Culture-negative peritonitis. I f the culture results are nega-
tive at 24 hours, then the most likely explanation is that a 
bacterial infection was present but that the responsible 
organisms failed to grow in the culture sample. Some-
times, growth appears only after 5–7 days, and  cultures 
should be incubated for this length of time. Manage-
ment depends on whether the patient is improving 
clinically. Although the current ISPD recommendation 
is to  continue both of the initial antibiotics for a full 
14 days (Li, 2010), many authorities recommend discon-
tinuing the gram-negative coverage (i.e., ceftazidime or 
aminoglycoside) after 3 days if the patient is improv-
ing. Patients with culture-negative peritonitis who do 
not improve should be recultured using special culture 
techniques to look for unusual organisms such as yeast, 
mycobacteria, and fungi. If a dialysis program has a rate 
of culture-negative peritonitis >20%, the culture meth-
ods should be reviewed.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   504 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 505
Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis  or with 
nontuberculous mycobacteria sometimes presents as 
culture-negative peritonitis. When mycobacterial perito-
nitis is suspected, special attention must be paid to cul-
ture techniques. Diagnostic sensitivity can  be improved 
by culturing the sediment after centrifugation of a large 
volume of effluent (50–100 mL) using a solid medium 
(such as Lowenstein–Jensen agar) and a fluid medium 
(Septi-chek, BACTEC, etc.). Catheter removal is often 
required but is not mandatory provided prompt therapy 
is given. This consists of a multiple-drug regimen (usually 
isoniazid, rifampin, ofloxacin, and pyrazinamide). Strep-
tomycin and ethambutol are generally not recommended 
in dialysis patients.
e. Fungal peritonitis.  F ungal peritonitis is a serious compli -
cation and should be strongly suspected after recent 
antibiotic treatment for bacterial peritonitis. Other pre-
disposing factors to fungal peritonitis include diabetes 
mellitus, immunosuppression (e.g., immunosuppressive 
therapy, HIV infection), and malnutrition, especially a 
low serum albumin level. Candida  is the most prevalent 
species cultured, but many types of fungi can be respon-
sible. The ISPD recommendation is prompt removal of 
the catheter as soon as fungi are identified by gram stain 
or culture (Li, 2010), together with treatment for at least 
10 days with antifungal agents. The patient is then main-
tained on hemodialysis. In some patients, a new catheter 
can be inserted 4–6 weeks later, provided that  at least 
1 week has elapsed since all clinical evidence of peritoni-
tis has subsided.
In an attempt to limit adhesion formation, in addi-
tion to catheter removal, prolonged oral administration 
of antifungal drugs, such as flucytosine, miconazole, flu-
conazole, ketoconazole, itraconazole, or voriconazole, 
has been employed. Voriconazole or posaconazole is 
an alternative to amphotericin B when filamentous 
fungi have been cultured, but neither of them can be 
used alone for Candida  peritonitis (even with catheter 
removal). The recommended dosages of these agents are 
the same as for patients with normal renal function, with 
the exception of flucytosine, for which the dosage must 
be reduced (see Chapter 35). The unavailability of oral flu-
cytosine in many countries and the high price of many 
new antifungal agents may affect local practice.
4. Refractory peritonitis and indications for catheter removal.  Refrac-
tory peritonitis is defined as failure of peritonitis to clear 
after 5 days of appropriate antibiotics. Catheter removal is 
indicated in order to reduce patient morbidity and preserve 
the peritoneal membrane. Ultrasound, computed tomogra-
phy, or gallium scan is indicated if an intra-abdominal ab-
scess is suspected, since in such cases surgical exploration 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   505 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
506
and drainage may be needed at the time of or after cath-
eter removal. In general, it is preferable to remove the PD 
catheter in patients who do not respond to antimicrobials 
rather than subject the patient to a long period of exposure 
to antibiotics, with increased risk of superinfection and 
morbidity, and of damage to the peritoneal membrane. 
After catheter removal, the safe time interval before a new 
catheter can be inserted is controversial and probably de-
pends on the severity of the peritonitis and whether fungal 
peritonitis or tunnel infection was present. A conservative 
approach is to wait 4–6 weeks. Resumption of PD is pos-
sible in approximately one-half of patients, but may neces-
sitate a change in dialysis prescription to achieve adequate 
dialysis and ultrafiltration (Szeto, 2002a).
5. Relapsing, recurrent, and repeat peritonitis.  R elapsing peritoni -
tis is defined as peritonitis with the same organism within 4 
weeks of stopping antimicrobial therapy; S. epidermidis  or 
a gram-negative organism is usually involved, but relapsing 
culture-negative peritonitis is also common. In the case of 
relapsing gram-negative peritonitis, catheter removal, with 
or without surgical exploration, should be strongly consid-
ered, especially in cases of Pseudomonas  infection. If it is 
decided to treat the patient medically, either the aminogly-
coside dose should be administered intermittently or an 
alternative agent should be employed. With less serious in-
fections, it may be possible to insert a new catheter, simul-
taneous with the removal of the old one, obviating the need 
for hemodialysis. The new catheter should be inserted well 
away from the old exit site. This approach has been particu-
larly useful in the management of relapsing peritonitis due 
to coagulase-negative staphylococci.
Recent studies suggest that relapsing and recurrent 
peritonitis episodes are caused by a different spectrum of 
bacteria, and probably represent two distinct clinical enti-
ties (Szeto, 2009). Notably, recurrent peritonitis episodes 
had a worse prognosis than relapsing ones. Although repeat 
peritonitis episodes generally have a satisfactory response 
to antibiotic, they have a substantial risk of developing 
further relapsing or repeat peritonitis (Szeto, 2011b) with 
treatments of relapsing, recurrent, or repeat peritonitis.
a. Fibrinolytic enzymes.  S treptokinase and urokinase have 
been used by some investigators in the treatment of 
refractory or relapsing peritonitis. These agents are used 
in an attempt to release bacteria entrapped in fibrin 
within the peritoneum or along the catheter, thus making 
it possible to eradicate the infection. Controlled studies 
have not proved this approach to be effective compared 
with catheter removal and replacement  (Williams, 1989).
6. Peritonitis with catheter obstruction . Ca theter obstruction of-
ten accompanies peritonitis. Management is discussed in 
Chapter 23.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   506 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 507
7. Prophylactic antibiotic use.  Prophylactic antibiotic use does
not prevent peritonitis; this is probably true even for pa-
tients with exit-site infections. However, short-term pro-
phylactic systemic antibiotics may be beneficial in the
following settings: (a) before catheter placement (vanco-
mycin or cefazolin); (b) to prevent bacteremia during inva-
sive procedures, such as dental procedures (amoxicillin 2 g) 
or colonoscopy, colonoscopic polypectomy, hysteroscopy,
or cholecystectomy (ampicillin plus an aminoglycoside);
and (c) after an accidental contamination.
8. Prevention. The use of prophylactic antibiotic has been dis-
cussed above. Spiking of dialysis bags is a high-risk proce-
dure for contamination of the system; the “flush before fill” 
reduces the risk of contamination. Double-cuffed catheters 
may provide an added barrier to periluminal movement of
S. aureus into the peritoneum, and they are clearly superior 
to single-cuffed catheters in decreasing the risk of perito-
nitis. No particular catheter has been definitively shown to 
be better than the standard silicon double-cuff catheter for 
the prevention of peritonitis.
A number of perioperative measures may help to re-
duce the incidence of peritonitis (Crabtree, 2005). Skin exit 
site should be directed downward or laterally. Subcutane-
ous tunnel incision should not exceed the diameter of the 
dialysis catheter. The subcutaneous cuff should be posi-
tioned 2 to 3 cm from the exit site. Exit site should be the 
smallest hole possible that provides catheter exit. There 
should be no sutures anchoring the catheter at the exit site.
Hypokalemia is associated with an increased risk of en-
teric peritonitis, and therefore if present, should be treated. 
There is an association between both severe constipation 
and enteritis and peritonitis owing to enteric organisms. It 
is logical to treat any bacterial enteritis if present. A recent 
observational study suggests that lactulose treatment may 
reduce the risk of peritonitis (Afsar, 2010).
Training methods have a substantial influence on the 
risk of PD infections, and training should follow standard 
guidelines (Bernardini, 2006); each PD program should 
consult the standard ISPD guidelines to prepare the trainer 
and develop a specific curriculum. Each program must also 
decide when and how often to routinely retrain patients; 
there is no published study in this area. Retraining should 
be considered following peritonitis or catheter infection, as 
well as following change in dexterity, vision, or mental acu-
ity. After each peritonitis episode, it is prudent to perform a 
root cause analysis to determine etiology so that interven-
tions can be planned to prevent future episodes.
II. EXIT-SITE AND TUNNEL INFECTION.  Approximately one-fifth of peri-
tonitis episodes are temporally associated with exit-site and tun-
nel infections (Piraino, 2005). Purulent drainage from the exit
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   507 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
508
site generally indicates the presence of infection, while erythema 
alone may or may not represent infection.
A. Incidence. The incidence of exit-site infections is approxi-
mately 1 episode every 24–48 patient-months. Patients 
with previous infections tend to have a higher frequency of 
occurrence.
B. Etiology and pathogenesis.  Exit-site infections are predomi-
nantly due to S. aureus  and P. aeruginosa. S. epidermidis is the 
causative organism in <20% of patients. Approximately 45% 
of patients are nasal carriers of S. aureus , and nasal carriage 
is associated with exit-site infection and peritonitis (Luzar, 
1990a, 1990b). Eradication of the carrier state is helpful in  
effective management.
C. Therapy. Treatment is dependent on whether there is ery -
thema alone, or erythema along with purulent drainage. For 
erythema alone, topical treatment with hypertonic saline, 
hydrogen peroxide, or mupirocin 2% ointment is usually suf-
ficient. Mupirocin ointment should not be used with polyure-
thane catheters (e.g., many catheters made by Vas-Cath or the 
Cruz catheter from Corpak) because the polyethylene glycol 
in mupirocin ointment will degrade the polyurethane and 
destroy the catheter. Ciprofloxacin otologic solution can be 
used with polyurethane catheters, but efficacy in treating exit-
site infection is unknown (Montenegro, 2000).
Treatment is more problematic when there is exit-site in-
fection with purulent drainage; such infection may extend into 
the subcutaneous tunnel and be evident only on ultrasound 
examination of the catheter tract (Vychytil, 1999). Therapy 
should be based on the results of gram stain and culture. The 
gram stain of exit-site drainage and microbiologic culture find-
ings can guide initial therapy. If gram-positive organisms are 
found, a cephalosporin or an antistaphylococcal penicillin PO 
is first-line treatment. If no improvement occurs after 1 week 
despite appropriate treatment based on culture and sensitivity, 
rifampin 600 mg per day PO may be added. If the infection has 
not resolved in 2 weeks, a surgical approach (deroofing, outer-
cuff shaving, or catheter removal) may be required. If tunnel 
infection is present, early cuff excision in combination with an-
tibiotic administration results in a substantial rate of catheter 
salvage (Suh, 1997), although catheter removal is sometimes 
required, especially when there is coexisting peritonitis.
If gram-negative organisms are present, treatment 
should be based on sensitivity results. Oral quinolones are 
useful, though care must be taken to avoid ingestion of mul-
tivalent cations (calcium, iron, zinc, antacids) within 2 hours 
of drug ingestion. With more serious pseudomonal infec-
tions, IP ceftazidime or aminoglycoside may be necessary. 
Regardless, antibiotic therapy must be continued until the 
exit site appears entirely normal. Two weeks is the minimum 
length of treatment time, and treatment for 3 weeks is prob-
ably necessary for exit-site infections caused by P. aeruginosa . 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   508 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 509
Catheter removal should be considered at an early time point 
for exit-site infections caused by P. aeruginosa  or if there is 
tunnel infection; replacement with a new catheter at a dif-
ferent site as a single procedure is often feasible. Table 27.6 
lists appropriate oral antimicrobial doses for the treatment 
of exit-site infections.
D. Prevention. A ntibiotic protocols against S. aureus  nasal carriage 
are effective in reducing the risk of S. aureus  catheter infec -
tions. Protocols used include rifampin (600 mg PO for 5 days), 
mupirocin (2% ointment twice daily for 5 days every 4 weeks), 
and trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (one single-strength 
tablet three times weekly). In a randomized controlled trial, 
rifampin 600 mg PO for 5 days given every 3 months was effec-
tive in decreasing catheter infections (Zimmerman, 1991). In a 
multicenter randomized trial (Mupirocin Study Group, 1996), 
use of nasal mupirocin in the regimen stated above in S. aureus 
Oral Antimicrobial Doses for Exit-Site and Tunnel Infections
27.6
TABLE
Amoxicillin 250–500 mg b.i.d.
Cephalexin 500 mg b.i.d.
Ciprofloxacin 250–500 mg b.i.d.
Clarithromycin 250–500 mg b.i.d.
Dicloxacillin 250–500 mg b.i.d.
Fluconazole 200 mg once daily
Flucloxacillin 500 mg b.i.d.
Flucytosine 2-g load, then 1 g PO, q.day
Isoniazid 300 mg once daily
Linezolid 600 mg b.i.d.
Metronidazole 400 mg b.i.d. for <50 kg
400–500 t.i.d. for >50 kg
Ofloxacin 400 mg first day, then 200 mg once daily
Pyrazinamide 35 mg/kg per day (given as b.i.d. or once 
daily)
Rifampin 450 mg once daily for <50 kg
600 mg once daily for >50 kg
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 80/400 mg once daily
b.i.d., two times per day; PO, orally; t.i.d., three times per day.
Reproduced from Piraino B, et al. Peritoneal dialysis-related infections recommendations:  
2005 update. Perit Dial Int. 2005;25:107–131.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   509 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
510
nasal carriers resulted in a significant decline in exit-site infec-
tions from this organism; however, the overall incidence of 
exit-site infections was not decreased because of an increase 
in gram-negative infections, and rates of tunnel infection and 
peritonitis were not affected.
Prevention of catheter infections (and thus peritonitis) is 
the primary goal of exit-site care. There are sufficient data to 
support the use of exit-site antibiotic cream (either mupirocin 
or gentamicin) in all patients. In two clinical trials, mupirocin 
ointment applied daily to the exit site decreased the rate of both 
exit-site infections and peritonitis in comparison with a histor-
ical control group (Bernardini, 1996; Thodis, 1998). In another 
study (Bernardini, 2005), gentamicin cream was as effective 
as mupirocin in preventing S. aureus  infections and reduced 
P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative catheter infections. Peri-
tonitis, particularly that caused by gram-negative organisms, 
was reduced by 35%. Because of its efficacy against both gram-
positive and gram-negative infections, daily gentamicin cream 
at the exit site has been advocated as the prophylaxis of choice 
for PD patients. However, the risk of aminoglycoside resistance 
after prolonged usage has not been assessed.
Whether the incidence of exit-site infections is lower 
with double-cuff catheters is somewhat controversial (Nessim, 
2010; Segal, 2013). The method of catheter placement may be 
important. Leaving the catheter embedded subcutaneously for 
several weeks after placement (see Chapter 23) and then exte-
riorizing it prior to use may reduce the rate of exit-site infec-
tion. Use of chlorhexidine versus povidone–iodine solution is 
associated with a significant decrease in exit-site infections in 
children (Jones, 1995). Polyhexanide solution also appears to 
be better than povidone–iodine (Núñez-Moral, 2014). 
References and Suggested Readings
Afsar B, et al. Regular lactulose use is associated with lower peritonitis rates: an obser-
vational study. Perit Dial Int. 2010;30:243–246.
Ballinger AE, et al. Treatment for peritoneal dialysis-associated peritonitis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2014;26:CD005284.
Bernardini J, Price V , Figueiredo A; International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis (ISPD) 
Nursing Liaison Committee. Peritoneal dialysis patient training, 2006. Perit Dial 
Int. 2006;26:625–632.
Bernardini J, et al. A randomized trial of Staphylococcus aureus  prophylaxis in 
 peritoneal dialysis patients: mupirocin calcium ointment 2% applied to the exit 
site versus cyclic oral rifampin. Am J Kidney Dis. 1996;27:695–700.
Bernardini J, et al. Randomized, double-blind trial of antibiotic exit site cream for 
prevention of exit site infection in peritoneal dialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2005;16:539–545.
Bunke M, et al. Pseudomonas peritonitis in peritoneal dialysis patients: the Network 9 
Peritonitis Study. Am J Kidney Dis. 1995;25:769–774.
Cho Y, Johnson DW . Peritoneal dialysis-related peritonitis: towards improving 
 evidence, practices, and outcomes. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;64:278–289.
Cho Y, et al. Biocompatible dialysis fluids for peritoneal dialysis. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2014;27:CD007554.
Choi P , et al. Peritoneal dialysis catheter removal for acute peritonitis: a retrospective 
analysis of factors associated with catheter removal and prolonged postoperative 
hospitalization. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004;43:103–111.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   510 09/10/14   1:34 am
Chapter 27 / Peritonitis and Exit-Site Infection 511
Crabtree JH, et al. A laparoscopic method for optimal peritoneal dialysis access. Am 
Surg. 2005;71:135–143.
Daugirdas JT, et al. Induction of peritoneal fluid eosinophilia and/or monocytosis by 
intraperitoneal air injection. Am J Nephrol. 1987;7:116–120.
Elamin S, et al. Low sensitivity of the exit site scoring system in detecting exit site 
 infections in peritoneal dialysis patients. Clin Nephrol. 2014;81:100–104.
Fielding RE, et al. Treatment and outcome of peritonitis in automated peritoneal dialy-
sis, using a once-daily cefazolin-based regimen. Perit Dial Int. 2002;22:345–349.
Gadallah M, et al. Role of preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis in preventing postop-
erative peritonitis in newly placed peritoneal dialysis catheters. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2000;36:1014–1019.
Humayun HM, et al. Peritoneal fluid eosinophilia in patients undergoing maintenance 
peritoneal dialysis. Arch Intern Med. 1981;141:1172–1173.
Jones LL, et al. The impact of exit-site care and catheter design on the incidence of 
catheter-related infections. Adv Perit Dial. 1995;11:302–305.
Kern EO, et al. Abdominal catastrophe revisited: the risk and outcome of enteric 
 peritoneal contamination. Perit Dial Int. 2002;22:323–324.
Kerschbaum J, et al. Treatment with oral active vitamin D is associated with decreased 
risk of peritonitis and improved survival in patients on peritoneal dialysis. PLoS 
One. 2013;8:e67836.
Lai MN, et al. Intraperitoneal once-daily dosing of cefazolin and gentamicin for 
 treating CAPD peritonitis. Perit Dial Int. 1997;17:87–89.
Li PK, et al. Use of intraperitoneal cefepime as monotherapy in treatment of CAPD 
peritonitis. Perit Dial Int. 2000;20:232–234.
Li PK, et al. Comparison of clinical outcome and ease of handling in two double-bag 
systems in continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis—a prospective randomized 
controlled multi-center study. Am J Kidney Dis. 2002;40:373–380.
Li PK, et al. Peritoneal dialysis-related infections recommendations: 2010 update. Perit 
Dial Int. 2010;30:393–423.
Li PK, et al. Infectious complications in dialysis—epidemiology and outcomes. Nat Rev 
Nephrol. 2012;8:77–88.
Low CL, et al. Pharmacokinetics on once-daily IP gentamicin in CAPD patients. Perit 
Dial Int. 1996;16:379–384.
Lui SL, et al. Cefazolin plus netilmicin versus cefazolin plus ceftazidime for treating 
CAPD peritonitis: effect on residual renal function. Kidney Int. 2005;68:2375–2380.
Luzar MA, et al. Exit-site care and exit-site infection in continuous ambulatory peri-
toneal dialysis (CAPD): results of a randomized multicenter trial. Perit Dial Int. 
1990a;10:25–29.
Luzar MA, et al. Staphylococcus aureus nasal carriage and infection in patients on con-
tinuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. N Engl J Med. 1990b;322:505–509.
Manley HJ, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intermittent intraperitoneal cefazolin in 
 continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis patients. Perit Dial Int. 1999;19:  
67–70.
Manley HJ, Bailie GR. Treatment of peritonitis in APD: pharmacokinetic principles. 
Semin Dial. 2002;15:418–21.
Montenegro J, et al. Exit-site care with ciprofloxacin otologic solution prevents 
polyurethane catheter infection in peritoneal dialysis patients. Perit Dial Int. 
2000;20:209–214.
Monteon F, et al. Prevention of peritonitis with disconnect systems in CAPD: a ran-
domized controlled trial. The Mexican Nephrology Collaborative Study Group. 
Kidney Int. 1998;54:2123–2138.
Mupirocin Study Group. Nasal mupirocin prevents Staphylococcus aureus  exit-site 
infection during peritoneal dialysis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1996;7:2403–2408.
Nessim SJ, Bargman JM, Jassal SV . Relationship between double-cuff versus  single-cuff 
peritoneal dialysis catheters and risk of peritonitis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2010;25:2310–2314.
Núñez-Moral M, et al. Exit-site infection of peritoneal catheter is reduced by the use 
of polyhexanide: results of a prospective randomized trial. Perit Dial Int. 2014;34: 
271–277.
Piraino B, et al. A five-year study of the microbiologic results of exit site infections 
and peritonitis in continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 
1987;4:281–286.
Piraino B, et al. Increased risk of Staphylococcus epidermidis  peritonitis in patients 
on dialysate containing 1.25 mmol/L calcium. Am J Kidney Dis. 1992;19:371–374.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   511 09/10/14   1:34 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
512
Piraino B, et al. Peritoneal dialysis-related infections recommendations: 2005 update. 
Perit Dial Int. 2005;25:107–131.
Piraino B, et al. ISPD position statement on reducing the risks of peritoneal dialysis-
related infections. Perit Dial Int. 2011;31:614–630.
Ram R, et al. Cloudy peritoneal fluid attributable to non-dihydropyridine calcium 
channel blocker. Perit Dial Int. 2012;32:110–111.
Schaefer F, et al. Intermittent versus continuous intraperitoneal glycopeptide/  
ceftazidime treatment in children with peritoneal  dialysis-associated peritonitis. 
The Mid-European Pediatric Peritoneal Dialysis Study Group (MEPPS). J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 1999;10:136–45.
Segal JH, Messana JM. Prevention of peritonitis in peritoneal dialysis. Semin Dial. 
2013;26:494–502.
Shemin D, et al. Effect of aminoglycoside use on residual renal function in peritoneal 
dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;34:14–20.
Suh H, et al. Persistent exit-site/tunnel infection and subcutaneous cuff removal in PD 
patients. Adv Perit Dial. 1997;13:233–236.
Szeto CC, et al. Xanthomonas maltophilia peritonitis in uremic patients receiving 
 continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 1997;29:91–96.
Szeto CC, et al. Feasibility of resuming peritoneal dialysis after severe peritonitis and 
Tenckhoff catheter removal. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2002a;13:1040–1045.
Szeto CC, et al. Conservative management of polymicrobial peritonitis complicat-
ing peritoneal dialysis—a series of 140 consecutive cases. Am J Med. 2002b;113:  
728–733.
Szeto CC, et al. Recurrent and relapsing peritonitis: causative organisms and response 
to treatment. Am J Kidney Dis. 2009;54:702–710.
Szeto CC, et al. Persistent symptomatic intra-abdominal collection after catheter 
removal for PD-related peritonitis. Perit Dial Int. 2011a;31:34–38.
Szeto CC, et al. Repeat peritonitis in peritoneal dialysis: retrospective review of 181 
consecutive cases. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011b;6:827–833.
Thodis E, et al. Decrease in Staphylococcus aureus  exit-site infections and peritonitis 
in CAPD patients by local application of mupirocin ointment at the catheter exit 
site. Perit Dial Int. 1998;18:261–270.
Troidle L, et al. Two gram intraperitoneal cefazolin for the treatment of peritonitis. 
Perit Dial Int. 1997;17(suppl 1):S40.
Vychytil A, et al. Ultrasonography of the catheter tunnel in peritoneal dialysis patients: 
what are the indications? Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;33:722–727.
Williams AJ, et al. Tenckhoff catheter replacement or intraperitoneal urokinase: a ran-
domized trial in the management of recurrent continuous ambulatory peritoneal 
dialysis (CAPD) peritonitis. Perit Dial Int. 1989;9:65–67.
Yu AW , et al. Neutrophilic intracellular acidosis induced by conventional lactate-  
containing peritoneal dialysis solutions. Int J Artif Organs. 1992;15:661–665.
Zimmerman SW , et al. Randomized controlled trial of prophylactic rifampin for 
 wwperitoneal dialysis-related infections. Am J Kidney Dis. 1991;18:225–231.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch027.indd   512 09/10/14   1:34 am