513
The instillation of dialysis fluid into the peritoneal cavity is 
 accompanied by an increase in intra-abdominal pressure (IAP). The 
two principal determinants of its magnitude are dialysate volume 
and the position of the patient during the dwell. The supine posi-
tion is associated with the lowest IAP for a given dialysate volume; 
sitting is associated with the highest. Furthermore, actions such as 
coughing, bending, or straining at stool transiently increase IAP . The 
increased IAP can lead to a variety of mechanical complications in 
peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients.
 I. HERNIA FORMATION
A. Incidence and etiologic factors.  The incidence and prevalence of 
hernias are difficult to assess. Hernias can be asymptomatic 
and may be missed on cursory examination. It has been sug-
gested that as many as 10%–20% of patients may develop a 
hernia at some time on peritoneal dialysis.
Potential risk factors are listed in Table 28.1 and include 
large dialysate volumes and activities that involve isometric 
straining or the Valsalva maneuver. Furthermore, decondition-
ing of the musculature of the abdominal wall increases wall 
tension and predisposes to hernia formation.
Hernias, Leaks, 
and Encapsulating 
Peritoneal Sclerosis
Joanne M. Bargman
28
Large dialysate volumes
Sitting position
Isometric exercise
Valsalva maneuver (e.g., coughing, straining at stool)
Recent abdominal surgery
Pericatheter leak or hematoma
Obesity
Deconditioning
Multiparity
Congenital anatomical defects
Potential Risk Factors for Hernia Formation
28.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch028.indd   513 09/10/14   1:35 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
514
B. Types of hernia.  Many different types of hernia have been 
described in the peritoneal dialysis patient. These are listed in 
Table 28.2.
Indirect inguinal hernias are the result of bowel and/or 
dialysate tracking through the processus vaginalis, which in 
some individuals has remained patent rather than undergo -
ing normal obliteration. It is much more common in males. In 
boys, it is very likely that if one processus vaginalis is patent 
(causing inguinal hernia), then the other side is patent also, 
and repair (see below) should be done bilaterally.
C. Diagnosis. As mentioned above, hernias can be clinically 
occult. To better detect them, it is often useful to have the 
patient stand and “bear down” as this increases IAP and 
makes a hernia more obvious. Pericatheter hernias need to be 
differentiated from masses caused by a hematoma, seroma, or 
abscess. Ultrasonography can distinguish the solid-appearing 
hernia from the fluid collections characterizing these other 
conditions. The scrotal fullness of an indirect inguinal her -
nia has in its differential diagnosis hydrocele ( fluid/dialysate 
entering the scrotum through a patent processus vaginalis) 
and intrinsic scrotal or testicular pathology.
Delineation of a hernia can be aided by dye-assisted 
computed tomography (CT). First, 100 mL of Omnipaque 300 
is added to a 2-L bag of dialysate and then instilled into the 
peritoneal cavity. It is important that the patient then be as 
active and ambulatory as possible for the next 2 hours to 
facilitate the entry of dye into the hernia sacs. CT scanning 
is then performed. In the case of inguinal hernias, it is impor -
tant that the genitalia be scanned. The CT scan can indicate 
whether scrotal edema is the result of fluid tracking along a 
patent processus vaginalis or along the anterior abdominal 
wall (see below). This procedure can also help delineate ante-
rior abdominal wall hernia from isolated leaks. In other types 
of hernia, such as umbilical hernia, CT scanning is not neces-
sary because the diagnosis is usually obvious.
Ventral
Epigastric
Pericatheter
Umbilical
Inguinal (direct and indirect)
Femoral
Foramen of Morgagni
Cystocele
Spigelian
Richter’s
Enterocele
Types of Hernias Reported in Peritoneal Dialysis Patients
28.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch028.indd   514 09/10/14   1:35 am
Chapter 28 / Hernias, Leaks, and Encapsulating Peritoneal Sclerosis 515
Magnetic resonance imaging may be useful in the diagno-
sis of abdominal wall and genital leaks, and it may be helpful in 
patients with allergy to conventional radiologic dye. The dialy-
sate itself looks bright white on the MRI images.
D. T reatment.  Small hernias, especially umbilical hernias, pose 
the greatest risk of incarceration or strangulation of bowel. 
These should be repaired surgically. The patient should be 
warned that if a hernia stops being reducible, and especially 
if it becomes tender, medical consultation should be sought 
immediately. Any patient presenting with peritonitis 
should be examined for the presence of small strangu-
lated hernias, as these can lead to transmural leakage of 
bacteria and peritonitis. Large hernias can also be repaired 
surgically, as can cystocele and enterocele. Uterine prolapse 
(not really a hernia) can sometimes be managed with a pes-
sary, but ultimately hysterectomy may be necessary.
After surgical repair of a hernia, IAP must be kept as low as 
possible to facilitate healing. If the patient has significant resid-
ual renal function (e.g., 10 mL/min or more), it may be possible 
to stop dialysis altogether for a week and then recommence 
with small volumes (e.g., 1 L). The patient must be watched 
for the development of uremic symptoms or hyperkalemia. If 
automated peritoneal dialysis (APD) is available, the patient 
can dialyze supine and hence with lower IAP . If there is little 
or no renal function, low-volume peritoneal dialysis should be 
started postoperatively. An alternative is to hemodialyse the 
patient until wound healing is more complete (2–3 weeks).
Options for the patient with recurrent hernias include a 
reduction in strenuous physical activity, more frequent dialysis 
exchanges with lower volumes, or transfer to hemodialysis.
If the patient is too ill or refuses surgery, mechanical sup-
port of the hernia can be effected with a corset or truss. The 
patient should be warned about symptoms of incarceration 
and strangulation.
 II. ABDOMINAL W ALL AND PERICATHETER LEAK.  The precise incidence 
of  these complications is also unknown, but they are less com-
mon than hernias. Risk factors are similar to those outlined in 
Table 28.1. Poor surgical technique may play a role in the develop-
ment of pericatheter leak.
A. Diagnosis. Abdominal wall leak may be difficult to diag-
nose clinically. It may be mistaken for ultrafiltration failure 
when dialysate returns are less than the instilled volume 
 (see   Chapter  21). Weight gain is common as the dialysate 
accumulates in the tissues of the abdominal wall. The diag-
nosis should be considered when there are decreased effluent 
volumes, weight gain, protuberant abdomen, and absence 
of generalized edema. The patient should stand during the 
examination as this may reveal asymmetry of the abdomen. 
The abdominal wall itself may have a “boggy” look, with deep 
impressions made by waist bands, dialysate tubing, etc.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch028.indd   515 09/10/14   1:35 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
516
Pericatheter leak is usually diagnosed by wetness (dialy-
sate) on the exit site dressing. A urine dipstick placed on the 
wet part will test strongly positive for glucose. Diagnosis can 
be proven using contrast CT scanning as described under 
“Hernia formation” (Section I.C).
B. Treatment. Pericatheter leak usually occurs as a postop -
erative complication of catheter implantation. The patient 
should be drained and peritoneal dialysis stopped for at least 
24–48 hours. The longer the patient can be left off peritoneal 
dialysis, the greater the chance that the leak will seal itself. If 
necessary, the patient should receive hemodialysis, and peri-
toneal dialysis can be recommenced several days later. In most 
cases, the leak seals spontaneously. If it persists, the catheter 
should be removed and reinserted at another site, and special 
care should be taken in catheter implantation. Antibiotic pro-
phylaxis is not usually necessary for pericatheter leak unless 
there are obvious signs of infection.
In contrast to pericatheter leaks, abdominal wall leaks 
can occur early or late. APD in the supine position usually 
allows the dialysate accumulation to resolve. If the leak is the 
result of disruption of abdominal wall integrity, the patient 
should be converted to a day dry APD regimen or to hemo -
dialysis. Sometimes, the abdominal wall defect heals after a 
transient course of day dry APD and continuous ambulatory 
peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) can then be resumed. Sometimes 
surgical repair is feasible.
Vaginal leaks can also occur. Other leaks can be due to 
dissection of dialysate through fascial defects and require 
patients to convert to day dry APD or hemodialysis.
III. GENITAL EDEMA
A. Pathogenesis. Dialysate can reach the genitalia by two routes:
One is by traveling down a patent processus vaginalis to the 
tunica vaginalis, resulting in hydrocele. In this first route, the 
dialysate can also dissect through the walls of the tunica vagi-
nalis, causing edema of the scrotal (or, less commonly, labial) 
wall itself. The second route is through a defect in the abdomi-
nal wall, often associated with the catheter tract. In this 
instance, the dialysate tracks inferiorly along the abdominal 
wall. This leads to edema of the foreskin and scrotum, or mons 
pubis.
B. Diagnosis. This complication is often painful and distressing 
to the patient who will be quick to bring it to medical atten-
tion. CT peritoneography should be performed to distin -
guish which route has led to the genital swelling (i.e., anterior 
abdominal wall or processus vaginalis). Alternatively, 3–5 mCi 
of technetium-labeled albumin colloid can be injected into the 
dialysate and infused into the patient, and the route of leakage 
traced by scintigraphy.
C. Treatment. Peritoneal dialysis should be temporarily stopped. 
Bed rest and scrotal elevation are helpful. Depending on the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch028.indd   516 09/10/14   1:35 am
Chapter 28 / Hernias, Leaks, and Encapsulating Peritoneal Sclerosis 517
need, temporary APD with low volumes and with the patient 
supine can often be used without causing reaccumulation 
of genital edema. If necessary, hemodialysis can be used 
temporarily.
A leak via a patent processus vaginalis can be repaired 
surgically. If the leak is through the anterior abdominal wall, 
replacement of the catheter may be required. APD in the 
supine position with low volume or no day dwell allows lower 
IAP and decreases the chances of recurrent leakage.
 I V. RESPIRATORY COMPLICATIONS
A. Hydrothorax. Under the influence of raised IAP , dialysate can 
travel from the peritoneal to the pleural cavity, leading to a 
pleural effusion composed of dialysis effluent. This complica -
tion is termed hydrothorax.
1. Incidence and etiologic factors.  The incidence of hydrothorax 
is unknown because the pleural effusion may be small and 
asymptomatic. It is less common than hernia.
There are defects in the hemidiaphragm that allow 
passage of dialysate. These defects may be congenital, in 
which case hydrothorax can occur with the first dialysis 
exchange, or acquired, in which case hydrothorax can be a 
late complication. Hydrothorax occurs almost exclusively 
on the right side, probably because the left hemidiaphragm 
is mostly covered by the heart and pericardium.
2. Diagnosis. Symptoms of hydrothorax range from asymp -
tomatic pleural effusion to severe shortness of breath. 
Acute shortness of breath at the beginning of PD therapy 
should suggest this diagnosis. Thoracentesis can be done 
for diagnosis and/or to relieve symptoms. The most diag-
nostic feature of the pleural fluid is a very high glucose 
level, although this is often not found. It is otherwise typi-
cally transudative, with variable numbers of leukocytes.
Radionuclide scanning with technetium may be help -
ful. Technetium-labeled albumin colloid (5 mCi) is added 
to a dialysate bag, which is then infused into the patient. 
Posterior views are taken at 0, 10, 20, and 30 minutes and 
an anterior view at 30 minutes. It is important that the 
patient be ambulatory while the instilled tracer is dwell -
ing to increase IAP and flux into the pleural cavity. Late 
(2–3 hours) views may be necessary if the movement of 
the tracer into the pleural cavity is not detected by gamma 
camera in earlier shots. CT scanning with intraperitoneal 
dye can also be used.
3. T reatment.  If there are respiratory symptoms, peritoneal 
dialysis should be stopped immediately. Thoracentesis may 
be necessary; in which case, the diagnosis can be made by 
measuring glucose in the pleural fluid.
Definitive treatment entails repair of defects in 
the hemidiaphragm or obliteration of the pleural space 
(pleurodesis). Rarely, the dialysate itself acts as an irritant 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch028.indd   517 09/10/14   1:35 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
518
in the pleural cavity and causes pleurodesis, so that peri -
toneal dialysis can be resumed 1–2 weeks later. APD with 
low IAP (small volumes, supine position) can sometimes be 
carried out without recurrence. The movement of fluid into 
the pleural space is pressure-driven, so leaving the patient 
in the supine position is helpful. Surgical options for treat -
ment of hydrothorax are listed in Table 28.3.
B. Altered mechanics of breathing. Pulmonary function is unchanged 
with peritoneal dialysis, except for a mildly decreased func-
tional residual capacity. Arterial oxygenation has been 
observed to decrease slightly and transiently with start of 
CAPD.
Peritoneal dialysis does not worsen respiratory symptoms 
in patients with obstructive pulmonary disease. The tonic 
stretch placed on the diaphragm by the raised IAP may actually 
facilitate the mechanics of breathing in these patients.
 V. BACK PAIN
A. Pathogenesis. The presence of dialysate in the peritoneal cav-
ity both raises IAP and swings the body’s center of gravity for-
ward, producing lordotic stress on the lumbar vertebrae and 
paraspinal muscles. In predisposed individuals, the altered 
spinal mechanics can lead to exacerbation of sciatica or pos-
terior facet symptoms. Lax anterior abdominal musculature 
will exacerbate this effect.
B. Treatment. Bed rest and analgesia are important when symp-
toms are acute. Some patients benefit by the performance 
of more frequent exchanges with smaller dialysate volumes. 
If possible, APD with a small or no day dwell is advisable for 
these patients because dialyzing supine removes the lordotic 
stress on the lumbar spine. Ideally, the patient should under -
take abdomen and back strengthening exercises, but this is 
not always feasible.
VI. OVERFILL. Overfill is defined as a clinical event in which symptoms 
of raised IAP occur acutely in association with a very high dwell
volume to fill volume ratio. It is most likely to be significant if
the ratio exceeds 2.0, for example, a 4-L end-dwell volume in a
patient whose fill volume is 2 L. Symptoms typically include acute 
Pleurodesis
 Talc
 Oxytetracycline
Autologous blood
Aprotonin–fibrin glue
Repair of hemidiaphragm
Oversewing defects
Reinforcement with patches
Surgical Options for Treatment of Hydrothorax
28.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch028.indd   518 09/10/14   1:35 am
Chapter 28 / Hernias, Leaks, and Encapsulating Peritoneal Sclerosis 519
abdominal discomfort or shortness of breath. Most  episodes 
result from situations where dialysis solution volume is infused 
without adequate drainage of the previous dwell volume. This 
may be accidental, but more often it is associated with poor cath-
eter outflow function. A large volume of ultrafiltrate may also 
contribute. Significant overfill is more common in children, in 
patients on APD, especially when tidal prescriptions are being 
used and in those in whom minimum drain alarms are turned 
off. Newer cyclers make it more difficult to initiate cycling with-
out a complete drain of the day dwell and also have precautions 
in place to drain cumulative ultrafiltrate. Asymptomatic overfill 
episodes are probably quite common. Rarely, deaths have been 
associated with severe overfill.
VII. ENCAPSULATING PERITONEAL SCLEROSIS
A. Incidence and etiologic factors.  Encapsulating Peritoneal Sclero-
sis (EPS) is a rare but devastating complication of long-term 
PD that has been reported to occur in 1%–3% of patients. 
There is an early inflammatory phase associated with vague 
abdominal discomfort, a change to a rapid transport status, 
bloody effluent, and signs of inflammation, including eryth -
ropoietin-resistant anemia and elevated C-reactive protein. 
The inflammatory phase can progress, either with or without 
a “second hit” such as peritonitis, to a sclerosing phase where 
a fibrotic cocoon slowly encapsulates the small bowel. In this 
second phase, the patient typically shows weight loss and 
recurrent bowel obstruction.
The strongest risk factor for EPS is the duration of PD 
therapy. Although the overall incidence is low, it becomes sig-
nificant after 5 years and even more so after 10 years. Young 
age at onset of PD is also an independent risk factor. Patients 
who have transitioned to hemodialysis or renal transplant are 
still vulnerable.
There is no reliable association of EPS with the type 
or number of episodes of PD peritonitis, or with the type or 
strength of PD solutions used. Patients with underlying auto -
immune/inflammatory disease such as lupus or vasculitis may 
be predisposed.
B. Diagnosis and treatment. The inflammatory phase of EPS should 
be considered when a long-term PD patient presents with 
new bloody effluent, inflow or outflow pain, or generalized 
abdominal discomfort. The sclerosing phase is suggested by 
recurrent bowel obstruction. As mentioned, the patient may 
no longer be on PD. Inflammatory markers may be elevated.
Imaging is helpful in the sclerosing phase, where cocoon-
ing of the bowel is seen, in conjunction with thickening, 
tethering, enhancement, and calcification of the peritoneal 
membrane. Thickening of the peritoneal membrane is seen 
in any long-term PD patient and, by itself, is not diagnostic 
of EPS. Regular CT surveillance of long-term patients has not 
been shown to be helpful.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch028.indd   519 09/10/14   1:35 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
520
The inflammatory phase of EPS is best treated with 
 modest doses of corticosteroid. Infective causes should be 
ruled out before contemplating this therapy. The duration of 
treatment is unclear and could be titrated to the symptoms. 
Some studies have suggested the addition of tamoxifen or 
mTor inhibitors for their antifibrotic effects. As in any scleros-
ing condition, there is a better therapeutic window during the 
inflammatory phase than when there is already extensive scar 
formation.
It is not clear whether the patient should be transitioned 
to hemodialysis. On the one hand, it reduces continuing expo-
sure to the process that led to the EPS. On the other hand, 
leaving the abdomen dry stops the “washout” of inflammatory 
mediators that PD affords.
In the patient with an established abdominal cocoon and 
recurrent bowel obstruction, surgery may be necessary. It is 
very important to consult a surgeon who is familiar with the 
operative approach to this kind of patient, as the risk of bowel 
tear, fecal peritonitis, and operative mortality are all high.
References and Suggested Readings
Balda S, et al. Impact of hernias on peritoneal dialysis technique survival and residual 
renal function. Perit Dial Int. 2013;33:629–634.
Chow KM, et al. Management options for hydrothorax complicating peritoneal 
 dialysis. Semin Dial. 2003;16:389–394.
Cizman B, et al. The occurrence of increased intraperitoneal volume events in 
 automated peritoneal dialysis in the U.S.: role of programming, patient/user 
actions and ultrafiltration. Perit Dial Int. 2014;34:434–442.
Davis ID, et al. Relationship between drain volume /fill volume ratio and clinical 
 outcomes associated with overfill complaints in peritoneal dialysis episodes. Perit 
Dial Int. 2011;31:148–155.
Dimitriadis CA, Bargman JM. Gynecologic issues in peritoneal dialysis. Adv Perit Dial. 
2011;27:101–105.
Goldstein M, et al. Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis: a guide to imaging 
appearances and complications. Insights Imaging. 2013;4:85–92.
Goodlad C, et al. Screening for encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis in patients on 
 peritoneal dialysis: role of CT scanning. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2011;26:  
1374–1379.
Lew SQ. Hydrothorax: pleural effusion associated with peritoneal dialysis. Perit Dial 
Int. 2010;30:13–18.
Martinez-Mier G, et al. Abdominal wall hernias in end-stage renal disease patients on 
peritoneal dialysis. Perit Dial Int. 2008;28:391–396.
Prischl F, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of the peritoneal cavity among perito-
neal dialysis patients, using the dialysate as “contrast medium. ” J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2002;13:197–203.
Shah H, Chu M, Bargman JM. Perioperative management of peritoneal dialysis patients 
undergoing hernia surgery repair without the use of interim hemodialysis. Perit 
Dial Int. 2006;26:684–687.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch028.indd   520 09/10/14   1:35 am