521
Metabolic, Acid-Base, 
and Electrolye Aspects 
of Peritoneal Dialysis
Rajnish Mehrotra
While peritoneal dialysis (PD) provides effective control of many of 
the diverse consequences of uremia, the therapy itself has unique 
effects on several metabolic parameters that are important for the 
health of patients with end-stage renal disease.
 I. HYPERGLYCEMIA: With PD, ultrafiltration is induced by  exerting 
either crystalloidal osmotic or oncotic pressure across the 
 peritoneal barrier. This is achieved with PD solutions that 
 contain supraphysiologic concentrations of glucose; some 
 prescriptions also include once-daily treatment with either 
 icodextrin or amino-acid–based dialysis solution. Each one of 
these 
 substances is absorbed systemically during the course of 
the PD dwell  leading to systemic metabolic effects. Treatment 
with glucose- or icodextrin-based PD solutions results in an 
obligatory daily absorption of 50–150 g of carbohydrates. This 
obligatory carbohydrate absorption is higher with greater use of 
more hypertonic solutions, and in individuals with a faster peri -
toneal solute transfer rate. Absorbed icodextrin is metabolized, 
not to glucose but to a variety of oligosaccharides and to the 
disaccharide maltose (Moberley, 2002)
In some individuals with diabetes mellitus, this obligatory 
absorption results in poorer glycemic control and requires sig -
nificant adjustments in therapy. These may include an increase 
in total daily insulin dose, or initiation of insulin or other glucose-
lowering therapy for individuals who did not previously need 
such treatment. Hence, it is imperative to increase the intensity 
of home glucose monitoring in diabetic patients for the first few 
weeks after initiating PD, or whenever the prescribed tonicity of 
glucose-based dialysate is increased. Worse glycemic control is 
associated with worse outcomes in PD patients, but it is unclear 
whether this is association or cause and effect (Duong, 2011). 
There are limited data to determine how much PD increases the 
incidence of new-onset diabetes, but one Chinese study suggests 
that about 8% of nondiabetic patients become diabetic (Szeto, 
2007). Therefore, blood glucose levels should also be measured 
every 1–3 months in nondiabetic PD patients.
29
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch029.indd   521 09/10/14   1:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
522
Just as glucose-based dialysis solutions may worsen glyce-
mic control, glucose-sparing regimens may improve it. These 
glucose-sparing regimens generally comprise substitution of one 
glucose-based exchange with icodextrin; the greater ultrafiltra-
tion with icodextrin during the long dwell may allow for the use 
of lower concentrations of glucose for the other dwells  (Paniagua 
2008). Substituting a second glucose-based exchange with amino-
acid dialysate allows for further reduction in systemic glucose 
absorption. In IMPENDIA, a recently completed randomized 
trial, the HbA1c of individuals treated with a regimen in which 
two bags of glucose-based exchange were substituted with one 
bag each of icodextrin and amino-acid dialysate was 0.6% lower 
compared with individuals treated entirely with glucose-based 
dialysate (Li, 2013). Glucose-sparing regimens should be consid-
ered in individuals with diabetes treated with PD when there is 
difficulty in achieving glycemic control.
 II. WEIGHt GAIn: T he effects of increased body weight in PD are com-
plex. In hemodialysis patients, increased body weight is associ-
ated with improved survival, but the evidence is conflicting in PD 
patients, and there is a concern that obesity may predispose to 
catheter problems and exit site infection (Johnson, 2012). Patients 
often gain weight after initiation of dialysis irrespective of modal-
ity; this generally reflects gain in fat rather than in lean body mass. 
This weight gain is, at least in part, a result of increased dietary 
energy and protein intake following the amelioration of uremic 
anorexia with initiation of dialysis. In patients treated with PD, 
some of the weight gain is attributed to the obligatory systemic 
carbohydrate absorption. However, large head-to-head compari-
sons do not support the notion that patients treated with PD are 
more likely to gain significant weight when compared with indi -
viduals treated with hemodialysis (Lievense, 2012). Replacing 
glucose with icodextrin for the long day dwell in automated PD 
(APD) or for the night dwell in continuous ambulatory PD (CAPD) 
results in smaller gains in body weight, but this could reflect differ-
ences in total body water rather than body fat. Limited evidence 
suggests that the sites for deposition of excess body fat differ by 
dialysis modality with greater gain in visceral fat in PD patients; 
the clinical relevance of this is unclear (Choi, 2011). Despite this 
uncertainty, it is prudent to limit exposure to more hypertonic 
glucose dialysis solutions in order to avoid excessive weight gain.
 III. PERItonEAL P RotEIn Loss:  D uring PD, proteins in the blood—  
primarily albumin —move into the dialysate down their concen-
tration gradient across the peritoneal barrier and are lost as the 
dialysate is drained. The daily peritoneal protein loss with PD 
averages 6–8 g and is substantially increased during episodes of 
peritonitis. As a result of this obligatory daily loss, serum albumin 
may decrease in patients starting treatment with PD and is often 
lower than in individuals undergoing hemodialysis.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch029.indd   522 09/10/14   1:36 am
523Chapter 29 / Metabolic, Acid-Base, and Electrolye Aspects of Peritoneal Dialysis 
This daily peritoneal protein loss is generally not modifi -
able, and its clinical relevance remains unclear. The evidence 
associating the higher daily peritoneal protein loss with all-cause 
 mortality, cardiovascular events, or protein-energy wasting is, 
at best, inconsistent (Balafa, 2011). Moreover, the lower serum 
albumin in patients treated with PD does not seem to put these 
patients at any higher risk than patients undergoing hemodi -
alysis. All these considerations suggest that PD can be safely 
continued in patients that are otherwise well but have modest 
decrements in serum albumin levels with the therapy.
 I V. LIPId AbnoRMALItIEs: D yslipidemia is highly prevalent in patients 
undergoing maintenance dialysis and reflects the net effects of 
the uremic state, underlying causes of kidney disease (e.g., dia-
betic nephropathy, other proteinuric renal diseases), and the 
potential disparate effects of the dialysis modality. The obliga-
tory carbohydrate absorption and peritoneal protein loss with 
PD can adversely influence the lipid profile of PD patients. The 
lipid abnormalities described in PD patients include increases 
in total and low-density cholesterol, triglycerides, lipoprotein(a), 
and apolipoprotein B (Prichard, 2006).
The contribution of lipid abnormalities to the high 
 cardiovascular risk in patients treated with PD is presently 
unknown. The Study of Heart and Renal Protection (SHARP) 
is the only clinical trial examining the impact of lipid lower -
ing on cardiovascular events and mortality that has included 
patients undergoing PD; of the 9270 enrolled subjects, 496 were 
undergoing PD at the time of enrollment. While treatment with 
 simvastatin/ezetimibe was associated with fewer cardiovascular 
events in this clinical trial, there was no significant effect on either 
all-cause or cardiovascular mortality (Baigent, 2011).  Specifically, 
there was no significant difference in outcomes in the subgroup 
treated with PD. This trial suggests that the clinical benefit from 
lipid lowering may not be as large in patients with kidney disease, 
including those undergoing PD, as in the general population. It is 
important, however, to note that severe hypertriglyceridemia is 
also associated with a higher risk for pancreatitis in PD patients 
and so may warrant treatment to reduce this risk.
Limited data indicate that drug therapies are as effective in 
improving dyslipidemia in patients treated with PD as in the gen-
eral population. Some studies have also examined whether modi-
fications in the PD prescription can improve lipid abnormalities. 
Substituting one glucose-based exchange with icodextrin has 
been shown to have a modest effect on serum total cholesterol. In 
the IMPENDIA trial, a glucose-sparing regimen that included one 
exchange each with icodextrin and amino acids–based PD solu-
tion resulted in a significant decrease in both serum triglycerides 
and apolipoprotein B (Li, 2013). These modifications to the PD 
regimen may be considered in selected individuals for the treat -
ment of these lipid abnormalities.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch029.indd   523 09/10/14   1:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
524
 V. HYPokALEMIA/HYPERkALEMIA: T en to 30 percent of patients trea -
ted with PD are reported to have low serum potassium levels. 
There are several potential reasons for this high prevalence of 
hypokalemia. These include greater potassium removal with 
dialysis since PD solutions have no added potassium, inadequate 
dietary intake, transcellular shift induced by insulin released in 
response to the obligatory glucose absorption, renal losses in 
patients treated with diuretics, and gastrointestinal losses with 
use of laxatives (Zanger, 2010).
Observational studies have demonstrated that  hypokalemia 
is associated with a higher risk for gram-negative peritonitis 
and an increase in risk for all-cause, cardiovascular, and infec-
tion-related mortality in patients undergoing PD (Torlen, 2012). 
Whether correction of hypokalemia ameliorates any of these 
risks is not known. Oral administration of potassium supple-
ments is probably the easiest and safest way to correct hypo-
kalemia. While intraperitoneal administration of injectable 
potassium chloride can correct hypokalemia, it exposes patients 
to a higher risk of peritonitis from touch-contamination. Even 
though it is appealing to consider mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonists such as spironolactone, there is no significant effect 
on serum potassium levels in patients undergoing PD treated 
with these agents.  Significant hyperkalemia is uncommon in PD 
and is  typically related to nonadherence to the PD prescription.
 VI. MEtAboLIC ACIdosIs: P rogressive loss of excretory function in 
chronic kidney disease is associated with reduced renal acid 
excretion. Hence, metabolic acidosis is frequently present in 
patients at the time of starting dialysis. Conventional glucose- 
and icodextrin-based PD solutions contain lactate as the buf-
fer. During treatment with such solutions, bicarbonate enters 
the peritoneal cavity and is removed with each exchange, while 
lactate is absorbed systemically. The absorbed lactate is metab-
olized to bicarbonate, and this corrects the uremic metabolic 
acidosis. Bicarbonate-based PD solutions are available commer -
cially in some parts of the world; in patients treated with these 
solutions, the systemic absorption of bicarbonate is responsible 
for the correction of metabolic acidosis.
Regardless of the buffer used, PD provides a more  complete 
correction of metabolic acidosis than thrice-weekly in-  center 
hemodialysis. Yet the correction remains incomplete in a signifi-
cant minority of PD patients. There is evidence that uncorrected 
metabolic acidosis contributes to protein-energy wasting and 
osteopenia. Recent observational studies have also demonstrated a 
higher risk for all-cause or cardiovascular mortality in PD patients 
with persistently low serum bicarbonate levels (Vasishta, 2013). 
These data argue for treatment of persistent metabolic acidosis in 
patients undergoing PD.
A number of clinical trials have tested the clinical benefits 
with treatment of metabolic acidosis in PD patients  (Mehrotra, 
2009; Stein, 1997). These studies indicate that such  treatment is 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch029.indd   524 09/10/14   1:36 am
525Chapter 29 / Metabolic, Acid-Base, and Electrolye Aspects of Peritoneal Dialysis 
associated with higher net positive nitrogen balance,  significant 
weight gain, an increase in mid-arm circumference, and a 
 reduction in hospitalizations. Whether treatment of metabolic 
acidosis has any effect on the risk of death of patients undergo-
ing maintenance dialysis is unknown. In patients undergoing PD, 
oral administration of sodium bicarbonate is the most effective 
way to correct metabolic acidosis and should be used to achieve 
a serum bicarbonate level of at least 22 mmol/L.
 VII. HYPo/HYPERnAtREMIA: H yponatremia is quite common in PD 
patients, and one center recently reported a prevalence of 15% 
(Dimitriadis, 2014). Translocational hyponatremia (due to move-
ment of sodium-poor fluid from cells to extracellular fluid) can 
occur due to hyperglycemia, with the serum sodium falling about 
1.3 mmol/L for each 6 mmol/L rise in blood glucose. Icodextrin 
causes a 2–3 mmol/L fall in serum sodium by the same mecha-
nism. Dilutional hyponatremia in dialysis patients is generally 
thought to reflect excessive water intake, but recent studies in PD 
suggest it is more often a marker of decreased intracellular mass 
and is associated with weight loss, potassium depletion, and 
malnutrition. (Cherney, 2001; Dimitriadis, 2014). It should there-
fore be an indication for nutritional assessment of the patient. 
Rarely, hyponatremia can be factitious when serum sodium 
is measured by flame photometry in the presence of severe 
hypertriglyceridemia.
In contrast, treatment with PD has the potential to induce 
hypernatremia. In patients treated with PD, fluid is removed 
either through aquaporins or through interendothelial spaces 
in the peritoneal capillaries (See Chapter 21). The relative con-
tribution of aquaporins to fluid removal is greatest early in the 
course of a PD dwell, and this is not associated with any concomi-
tant removal of sodium or other solutes. APD prescriptions with 
short dwell times, particularly with hypertonic dialysate, have the 
potential therefore to remove more water relative to sodium, and 
this can result in hypernatremia. While the prevalence of hyper -
natremia with contemporary PD solutions and regimens is not 
known, >10% of patients treated with hourly exchanges using 
hypertonic PD solutions developed hypernatremia. Hypernatre -
mia can induce thirst and stimulate greater fluid intake, and it is 
prudent to avoid frequent exchanges with hypertonic dialysate 
when prescribing PD.
 VIII. AbnoRMALItIEs In MInERAL MEtAboLIsM: F or a discussion of the 
full range of abnormalities in mineral metabolism, see Chapter 
36. Discussion here is limited to issues specific to PD. Studies 
done almost two decades ago indicated that patients treated 
with PD were significantly more likely to have adynamic bone 
disease than individuals undergoing maintenance hemodialy -
sis. Small and relatively low-quality studies indicated that this 
risk could be ameliorated with the use of low-calcium dialysate 
(2.5 meq/L [1.25 mM]). The overwhelming majority of patients 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch029.indd   525 09/10/14   1:36 am
Part III / Peritoneal Dialysis
526
are now treated with low-calcium PD solutions, and there is 
increasing use of phosphate binders that do not contain elemen-
tal calcium, so the situation has changed. There are no contem-
porary studies that have examined bone histology in patients 
undergoing PD, and hence the current prevalence of adynamic 
bone disease is unclear.
References and suggested Readings
Baigent C, et al. The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol with simvastatin plus  ezetimibe 
in patients with chronic kidney disease (Study of Heart and Renal protection): a 
randomized placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;377:2181–2192.
Balafa O, et al. Peritoneal albumin and protein losses do not predict outcomes in 
 peritoneal dialysis patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:561–566.
Cherney DZ, et al. A physiological analysis of hyponatremia: implications for patients 
on peritoneal dialysis. Perit Dial Int. 2001;21:7–13.
Choi SJ et al. Changes in body fat mass after starting peritoneal dialysis. Perit Dial Int. 
2011;31:67–73.
Dimitriadis C, et al. Hyponatremia in peritoneal dialysis: epidemiology in a single 
center and correlation with clinical and biochemical parameters. Perit Dial Int. 
2014;34:260–270.
Duong U, et al. Glycemic control and survival in peritoneal dialysis patients with 
 diabetes mellitus. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:1041–1048.
Fried L, et al. Recommendations for the treatment of lipid disorders in patients on 
peritoneal dialysis. ISPD guidelines/recommendations. Perit Dial Int. 1999;19:7–16.
Johnson DW . What is the optimal fat mass in peritoneal dialysis patients? Perit Dial 
Int. 2007;27(suppl 2):S250–S254.
Li PK, et al Randomized controlled trial of glucose sparing peritoneal dialysis in 
 diabetic patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:1889–1900.
Lievense H, et al. Relationship of body size and initial dialysis modality on subsequent 
transplantation, mortality and weight gain of ESRD patients. Nephrol Dial Trans-
plant. 2012;27:3631–3638.
Mehrotra R, et al. Effect of high-normal compared with low-normal arterial pH on 
protein balances in automated peritoneal dialysis patients. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2009;90:1532–1540.
Mehrotra R, et al. Adverse effects of systemic glucose absorption with peritoneal 
 dialysis: How good is the evidence? Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2013;22:663–668.
Moberley JB, et al. Pharmacokinetics of icodextrin in peritoneal dialysis patients. 
 Kidney Int Suppl. 2002;81:S23–S33.
National Kidney Foundation. K/DOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines for managing 
dyslipidemias in chronic kidney disease. http:www.kidney.org/professionals/
KDOQI?guidelines_lipids/toc.htm (Last accessed, August 25, 2014).
Paniagua R, et al. Icodextrin improves fluid and metabolic management in high and 
high-average transport patients. Perit Dial Int. 2009;29:422–432.
Prichard SS. Management of hyperlipidemia in patients on peritoneal dialysis: current 
approaches. Kidney Int Suppl. 2006;103:S115–S117.
Stein A, et al. Role of an improvement in acid base status and nutrition in CAPD 
patients. Kidney Int. 1997;52:1089–1095.
Szeto CC, et al. Oral sodium bicarbonate for the treatment of metabolic acidosis in 
peritoneal dialysis patients: a randomized placebo-control trial. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2003;14:2119–2126.
Szeto CC, et al. New onset hyperglycemia in nondiabetic chinese patients started on 
peritoneal dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2007;49:524–532.
Torlen K, et al. Serum potassium and cause-specific mortality in a large peritoneal 
dialysis cohort. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7:1272–1284.
Vashishta T, et al. Dialysis modality and correction of metabolic acidosis: relationship 
with all-cause and cause-specific mortality. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;8:254–264.
Zanger R. Hyponatremia and hypokealemia in pateints on peritoneal dialysis. Semin 
Dial. 2010;23:575–580.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch029.indd   526 09/10/14   1:36 am