555
Diabetes
David J. Leehey, Mary Ann Emanuele, 
and Nicholas Emanuele
More than 40% of all new patients starting dialysis in the United 
States are diabetic. Provision of maintenance dialysis for this group 
can be a challenging task. Morbidity and mortality are substantially 
higher in diabetic patients maintained on dialysis than in their non -
diabetic counterparts, with cardiovascular disease and infection 
being the leading causes of death. In the United States, the 3-year 
survival rate of diabetic patients maintained on dialysis is only about 
50% (USRDS, 2013).
 I. WHEN TO INITIATE DIALYSIS.  Early referral to nephrologists of dia-
betic patients with renal failure reportedly improves outcomes. 
Previous guidelines emphasized initiation of dialysis prior to 
the appearance of frank uremic manifestations (at an estimated 
glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] of ≤15 mL/min per 1.73 m
2). 
However, a recent randomized controlled trial that examined 
mortality versus time of dialysis initiation, the IDEAL study, 
found no difference in survival between early or late initiation of 
dialysis, and in that study, approximately one-third of the partici-
pants were diabetic (Cooper, 2010).
II. HEMODIALYSIS VERSUS PERITONEAL DIALYSIS.  The potential prob -
lems with each form of dialysis are listed in Table 32.1. Long-term 
peritoneal dialysis (PD) in diabetic patients may complicate
control of blood sugar because altered glucose homeostasis is
stressed further by the large amount of glucose administered
via the dialysis solution. In addition, glucose absorption from
the abdominal cavity decreases appetite. Many PD patients have
difficulty ingesting the higher recommended amount of protein
for PD patients (1.2 g/kg daily). On the other hand, the incidence 
and severity of hypoglycemic episodes is reduced in continuous
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) or automated peritoneal
dialysis (APD) compared with hemodialysis (HD) because of the
constant or near-constant presence of glucose in the abdomen.
Rates of infection (peritonitis, exit-site and tunnel infections) and 
rates of catheter replacement are similar between diabetic and
nondiabetic patients on PD. Administration of insulin intraperi -
toneally appears to increase slightly the risk of peritonitis in PD
32
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   555 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
556
patients and, though appealing on physiologic grounds, is now 
less commonly employed. With HD, coexisting blood vessel dis-
ease often hinders creation of an adequate, long-lasting vascular 
access. The survival rates of both arteriovenous (AV) fistulas and 
grafts are substantially reduced in diabetic compared with non-
diabetic patients. A small fraction of diabetic patients develop 
severe hand ischemia after creation of an ipsilateral AV fistula, 
which can lead to gangrene and need for amputation; prompt 
ligation of the fistula is indicated in such instances. Because of 
autonomic nervous system dysfunction or cardiac diastolic dys -
function, diabetic patients are at increased risk for hypotension 
during HD. Problems with vascular access and increased risk 
of hypotension may cause diabetic patients to receive a lesser 
amount of dialysis (in terms of fractional urea clearance [Kt /V]) 
than their nondiabetic counterparts.
Modality Advantages Disadvantages
Hemodialysis Very efficient
Frequent medical follow-up 
(in-center)
No protein loss to dialysate
May be poorly tolerated in 
patients with advanced cardiac 
disease
Multiple arteriovenous access 
surgeries often required; risk of 
severe hand ischemia
Relatively high incidence of 
hypotension during dialysis 
session
Predialysis hyperkalemia
Prone to hypoglycemia
CAPD Good cardiovascular tolerance
No need for arteriovenous 
access
Good control of serum 
potassium
Lower risk of hypoglycemia
Peritonitis, exit-site infection, 
and tunnel infection (however, 
risks similar to those in 
nondiabetic dialysis patients)
Protein loss to dialysate
Increased intra-abdominal 
pressure effects (hernias, fluid 
leaks, etc.)
Often needs helper (e.g., some 
blind patients)
APD Good cardiovascular tolerance
No need for arteriovenous 
access
Good control of serum 
potassium
Lower risk of hypoglycemia
Good for blind diabetics
Peritonitis risk slightly less than 
for CAPD
Protein loss to dialysate
CAPD, continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis; APD, automated peritoneal dialysis.
Dialysis Modalities for Diabetics
32.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   556 11/10/14   3:42 am
557Chapter 32 / Diabetes
Lower extremity amputations are frequent in diabetic pa -
tients on either HD or PD. The rate of progression of retinopa-
thy appears to be similar between patients treated with HD and 
PD. Although visual impairment impedes training for CAPD and 
makes it difficult for the patient to perform the exchange proce -
dure properly, even blind diabetic patients can be trained to per-
form CAPD without a helper. When properly instructed, their risk 
of developing peritonitis is only slightly greater than the risk in 
sighted diabetics. A number of devices are available to help vi-
sually impaired patients connect the dialysis solution container 
to the peritoneal transfer set (see Chapter 22). APD is a better 
therapeutic choice for blind diabetic patients because many APD 
schedules require the performance of only one “on” and one “off ” 
procedure daily.
Earlier reports from the U.S. Renal Data System suggested 
that mortality is higher in diabetic patients, and especially dia-
betic women, on PD than in those on HD. Patient selection biases 
and/or inadequate PD may have affected these observations. In 
a subsequent large analysis, mortality risk was actually higher 
with HD than PD among younger diabetics with no comorbid-
ity but lower with HD in older diabetics, especially if they had 
comorbidities (Vonesh, 2004). These results are undoubtedly 
also affected by selection biases. Comorbidity and malnutrition 
have much larger effects on mortality than the dialysis modality. 
Meticulous management and prevention of cardiovascular and 
infectious morbidity may lead to substantial improvement in pa-
tient survival.
 III. DIET .  W hatever the mode of dialysis therapy, diabetic patients 
generally show evidence of wasting and malnutrition. Many fac-
tors contribute, including chronic inflammation, inadequate 
food intake, diabetic gastroparesis and enteropathy, and the 
catabolic stress associated with frequent intercurrent illness. In 
the event of serious illness, diabetic dialysis patients often require 
early and intensive nutritional support.
A. Routine dietary prescription. T he diets advocated for nondiabetic 
HD and PD patients in Chapter 31 also apply to patients with 
diabetes. In an anuric diabetic patient being treated with HD, 
the stringent sodium, potassium, and fluid restrictions de-
scribed in Chapter 31 should be applied. Special effort should 
be made to limit intake of simple sugars and saturated fats.
1. Carbohydrates percentage.  T he general recommendation for 
a diabetic diet is for 50%–60% of intake to be carbohy-
drates, with some interest in using an even lower carbo-
hydrate diet in diabetic patients (Arora, 2005). In patients 
undergoing PD, the glucose calories supplied from the PD 
regimen (usually around 400 kcal) should be subtracted 
from the dietary carbohydrate prescription, and perhaps 
in selected patients with hypertriglyceridemia, a focus on 
avoiding all high-glycemic-index carbohydrates might be 
of benefit.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   557 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
558
2. Dietary “glycotoxins” from advanced glycosylation end products  
(AGEs). L evels of AGEs are increased in food that has been 
cooked at high temperature, especially if food contains 
a high proportion of fat. Dietary AGE ingestion has been 
linked to adverse lipid profiles and inflammatory mark -
ers in diabetic patients (Uribarri, 2005) and to increased 
serum levels of AGEs in end-stage kidney  disease (ESKD) 
patients, with perhaps increased risk of access thrombosis. 
Any reason to additionally restrict food in ESKD patients 
should be done with caution, given the high prevalence 
of malnutrition; however, some attention to food prepa -
ration with a focus on minimizing formation of AGEs 
(avoidance of deep frying, extensive heating) might be a 
consideration.
B. Diabetic gastroparesis and enteropathy. T he diagnosis of diabetic 
gastroparesis is often made on the basis of symptoms of nau-
sea, vomiting, early satiety, and postprandial fullness. Since 
other treatable conditions can have similar symptoms, an 
esophagogastroduodenoscopy should be performed before 
symptoms are ascribed to gastroparesis alone. The traditional 
“gold standard” to establish the diagnosis of gastroparesis is 
scintigraphic measurement of gastric emptying. However, a 
drawback is that scintigraphy exposes patients to radiation 
and is therefore not ideally suited for repeated investigations 
(to monitor the response to therapy). This problem can be 
overcome by 13C-labeled acetate and octanoic acid breath 
tests. Diabetic gastroparesis can be associated with poor food 
intake and unpredictable nutrient absorption; the result can 
be hypoglycemia alternating with hyperglycemia.
In such patients, small, frequent (up to six times per day) 
feedings may improve symptoms. The pharmacologic treat -
ment of gastroparesis in diabetic persons on dialysis is unsat -
isfactory. Metoclopramide given in a small starting dose (5 mg 
before meals) with small increments until results are seen is 
usually the first drug prescribed. This drug is associated with 
a high incidence of extrapyramidal complications in dialysis 
patients, particularly at higher doses, and its effects are often 
temporary. Other “prokinetic” gastrointestinal motility drugs, 
such as domperidone, motilin agonists, or ondansetron, may 
be tried.
Diabetic enteropathy r esults from functional impairment of 
the enteric nervous system and can result in disordered motil-
ity of the small bowel and the colon, resulting in either pro -
longed or shortened bowel transit times. Diabetic enteropathy 
with resulting diarrhea can complicate alimentation, causing 
debilitation, poor food intake, and hypoglycemia. Severe cases 
of diabetic enteropathy can be treated with a trial of broad-
spectrum antimicrobials (e.g., doxycycline in a dose of 50 or 
100 mg daily) to combat bacterial overgrowth in the intestine. 
Loperamide hydrochloride (up to 10 mg daily) to decrease 
bowel motility is also useful.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   558 11/10/14   3:42 am
559Chapter 32 / Diabetes
 I V. CONTROL OF BLOOD SUGAR
A. Alteration of insulin metabolism by CKD.  I n uremic patients (both 
diabetic and nondiabetic), insulin secretion by the β cells of 
the pancreas is reduced, and the responsiveness of peripheral 
tissues (e.g., muscle) to insulin is depressed; that is, there is 
increased insulin resistance. Insulin resistance occurs in al -
most all uremic patients and results in hyperglycemia. The lit-
erature suggests that hepatic glucose production and uptake 
are normal in uremia and that skeletal muscle is the primary 
site of insulin resistance, probably via a postreceptor defect 
(Castellino, 1992). However, many of the actions of insulin are 
maintained in renal failure, including potassium uptake by the 
cells and inhibition of proteolysis.
The kidney is pivotal in insulin metabolism in healthy 
individuals. Insulin is freely filtered by the glomerulus, with 
60% cleared via glomerular filtration and 40% by extraction 
from the peritubular vessels; less than 1% of filtered insulin is 
excreted in the urine unchanged. Approximately 6–8 units of 
insulin are degraded by the kidney each day, roughly 25% of 
the daily production of insulin by the pancreas. Renal metabo-
lism is enhanced in diabetic subjects receiving exogenous in-
sulin, since injected insulin bypasses the liver and goes directly 
into the systemic circulation. The rate of insulin catabolism is 
decreased owing to decreased renal mass, and therefore the 
half-life of any insulin present in the circulation is prolonged. 
The reduction in insulin clearance is also mediated by a de-
cline in hepatic metabolism. All of these abnormalities are only 
partially corrected after institution of maintenance dialysis 
 therapy.
1. Abnormal glucose tolerance tests in all dialysis patients.  Th e glu -
cose tolerance test cannot be used to diagnose diabetes in 
dialysis patients because the rise in serum glucose concen-
tration will be greater and more prolonged than normal in 
all dialysis patients as a result of uremia-induced insulin 
resistance. However, fasting serum glucose concentrations 
are normal in nondiabetic HD patients; a high level sug-
gests the presence of diabetes. In PD patients, a true fasting 
state is never achieved owing to constant absorption of glu-
cose from the dialysis solution. In this group, unless peri-
tonitis is present, the “fasting” serum glucose value rarely 
exceeds 160 mg/dL (8.9 mmol/L), even when using 4.25% 
dextrose dialysis solution; higher levels suggest that the 
patient has diabetes. In CAPD patients using icodextrin, 
serum glucose values may be spuriously overestimated by 
auto-analyzers that use the glucose dehydrogenase method 
of sample analysis (Tsai, 2010).
2. Increased sensitivity to insulin.  I n diabetic dialysis patients 
being treated with exogenous insulin, the importance 
of reduced insulin catabolism overrides the impact of 
insulin resistance; when exogenous insulin is adminis-
tered, its effect may be intensified and prolonged. Thus, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   559 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
560
smaller-than-usual doses should be given. Bolus adminis-
tration of moderately large intravenous doses (e.g., 15 units 
of regular insulin), even when ketosis is present, can result 
in severe hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia can occur also after 
administration of the longer-acting insulins, such as iso-
phane insulin (NPH) and insulin glargine.
3. Hyperglycemia. T he clinical presentation of hyperglycemia 
is modified when renal function is absent. The absence 
of the “safety valve” effect of glycosuria may result in the 
development of severe hyperglycemia (serum glucose 
level >1,000 mg/dL [56 mmol/L]). Severe hyperosmolality 
with accompanying alteration of mental status is unusual 
because of the absence of water loss induced by osmotic 
diuresis. Indeed, even extreme hyperglycemia is often as-
ymptomatic in dialysis patients (Al-Kudsi, 1982). However, 
manifestations can include thirst, weight gain, and, on oc-
casion, pulmonary edema or coma (Tzamaloukas, 2004). 
Diabetic ketoacidosis, frequently accompanied by severe 
hyperkalemia and coma, can develop in insulin-dependent 
dialysis patients. Management of hyperglycemia with or 
without ketoacidosis differs from that in patients without 
renal failure in that administration of large amounts of 
fluid is unnecessary and generally contraindicated. All of 
the clinical and laboratory abnormalities of hyperglycemia 
are corrected by insulin administration, which often is the 
only treatment needed. To manage severe hyperglycemia, 
one can administer a continuous infusion of low-dose 
regular insulin (starting at 2 units/hr) with close clinical 
monitoring and measurement of serum glucose and po-
tassium concentrations at 2- to 3-hour intervals. If severe 
hyperkalemia is present, electrocardiography should be 
done. Emergency dialysis may be needed in patients with 
hyperglycemia and either severe pulmonary edema or life-
threatening hyperkalemia.
4. Hypoglycemia. A voidance of hypoglycemia is often the rate-
limiting step in obtaining good glucose control. Treat -
ment for hypoglycemia can lead to rebound hyperglycemia 
and erratic glycemic control. There are many factors that 
contribute to hypoglycemia, including decreased caloric 
intake due to attendant anorexia, decreased insulin clear -
ance, reduced renal gluconeogenesis due to the reduction 
in functioning renal mass, impaired release of the coun-
terregulatory hormone epinephrine due to the autonomic 
neuropathy of renal failure, decreased hepatic metabolism 
of insulin, and decreased metabolism of drugs that might 
promote a reduction in the plasma glucose concentration 
such as alcohol, propranolol and other nonselective adren-
ergic blockers. Additionally, hypoglycemic unawareness 
and gastroparesis may increase the risk for hypoglycemia. 
In diabetic patients, HD solution should always contain 
about 90 mg/dL (5 mM) glucose; if glucose is not added, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   560 11/10/14   3:42 am
561Chapter 32 / Diabetes
severe hypoglycemia during or soon after the HD session 
can result (Burmeister, 2012). Higher (200 mg/dL, 11 mM) 
dialysate glucose levels may increase the frequency of hy-
perglycemia (Raimann, 2012), and may not protect against 
hypoglycemic episodes better than the 90 mg/dL option.
B. Insulin therapy. A chieving and maintaining reasonable glucose 
control while avoiding hypoglycemia is the challenge in man-
aging patients with diabetes on dialysis. Reasonable glycemic 
control in diabetic patients on chronic dialysis is considered a 
fasting blood glucose below 140 mg/dL and a 1-hour postpran-
dial value of less than 200 mg/dL with an HbA1c between 7% 
and 8%. Several large studies have found no significant correla-
tion between glycemic control and survival, yet a much higher 
risk of hypoglycemia with stricter glycemic control (Williams, 
2010). The HbA1c target that is associated with the best out -
come in dialysis patients has not been established (KDOQI 
clinical practice guidelines, 2005). It has been suggested that 
measurement of glycated albumin more accurately assesses 
glycemic control in this population as it is not affected by the 
Hb level, but this test is not readily available. Another issue 
with HbA1c is that it can be affected (reduced) by administra-
tion of ESAs and iron (Ng, 2010).
Irreversibly and slowly formed compounds that are the 
result of nonenzymatic glycosylation of proteins, the so-called 
AGEs, alter the structure and function of vascular basement 
membranes, stimulate the production of growth factors, and 
alter the function of intracellular proteins. In PD patients, AGE 
deposition in the peritoneal membrane is associated with an 
increase in permeability and excessive protein losses in the di-
alysate (Nakamoto, 2002).
1. Insulin regimens. T he following dose recommendations have 
been made for insulin dosage in the setting of kidney dis-
ease (Snyder, 2004):
a. No dose adjustment is required if the GFR is above 
50 mL/min.
b. Reduce the insulin dose by 25% when the GFR is 
10–50 mL/min.
c. Reduce the dose by 50% when the GFR is less than 
10 mL/min.
2. Example using glargine and rapid-acting insulin.  A s an example, 
a common weight-based dose might be 0.6 units/kg total 
daily dose of insulin (Murphy, 2009). Reducing this by 50% 
for ESKD changes this to 0.3 units/kg total daily dose of in-
sulin (Baldwin, 2012). Of this, half should be given as basal 
insulin and half as mealtime bolus insulin. This would 
mean that 0.15 units/kg would be given in the morning as a 
basal dose, and then the remainder (0.15 units/kg) divided 
up by the number of meals, given as rapid-acting insulin; 
say 0.05 units/kg at breakfast, lunch, and supper. For a 70- 
kg patient, the total dose of insulin would be 70 kg × 0.3 
units/kg = 21 units. Half of this, or approximately 10 units, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   561 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
562
would be given as the basal once-daily glargine, and the re-
maining 11 units would be given over the 3 daily meals, or 
3–4 units rapid-acting insulin per meal.
3. Example using NPH plus a rapid-acting insulin. W hen using NPH 
with rapid-acting insulin, the total daily dose would be the 
same (21 units), but two-thirds of the daily dose (or 14 units) 
should be given as NPH, with two-thirds of the NPH (9 
units) given at breakfast and the remaining 5 units of NPH 
at bedtime. The non-NPH remainder of the total daily dose 
(7 units) would then be given as rapid-acting insulin, giving 
3 units at breakfast and 4 units at dinner. A lunchtime dose 
of rapid-acting insulin is not needed, as the morning dose 
of NPH is peaking at this time and would cover this meal.
4. Other insulin combinations.  N ew basal and rapid-acting in-
sulin analogs are expected to be available for clinical use 
in 2015, but have not been studied in patients with ESKD 
(Danne, 2011).
5. T iming of mealtime insulin.  W hile mealtime insulin is generally 
given about 5 minutes before the meal, some patients prefer 
to take it just after the meal. This is somewhat safer in that it 
allows patients to reduce the insulin dose if the entire meal is 
not eaten. For example, if only 50% of the meal is eaten, only 
50% of the dose is taken. Finer enhancements of the mealtime 
insulin dose include modification by carbohydrate counting 
(if the patient is willing to learn and implement this tech -
nique) and by addition to or subtraction from the mealtime 
insulin dose using a correction factor scale (if the patient is 
willing to check his or her glucose values before each meal).
6. Glucose monitoring. I t is important that blood glucose levels 
be monitored closely and that individually appropriate dose 
adjustments in insulin therapy be made. Patients receiving 
insulin therapy at home should monitor their glucose levels 
at least twice daily, in the morning and at bedtime. With 
both of the above regimens, a reasonable “correction dose” 
of insulin would be 1 extra unit of daily insulin for every 50 
mg/dL glucose above target ( for example the target level 
might be 150 mg/dL) for that patient.
7. Effect of hemodialysis on insulin dose.  HD h as been shown to 
improve both tissue sensitivity to insulin and insulin secre-
tory response to glucose (DeFronzo, 1978). The mechanism 
by which this occurs is unknown, but improved acid–base 
status may be contributing. When HD is initiated, the insu-
lin requirement in any given patient may change, depend -
ing on the net balance between improved tissue sensitivity 
and improved hepatic insulin metabolism. One cannot 
readily predict insulin requirements in this setting, and 
careful observation of the patient is essential.
In HD patients, several different insulin regimens can 
be used to achieve glycemic control. The glargine- and NPH-
based regimens described above can be used as a starting 
point. Some experts feel that long-acting insulin preparations 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   562 11/10/14   3:42 am
563Chapter 32 / Diabetes
should be avoided, while others feel that such agents should be 
used, but there are no head-to-head comparisons of different 
regimens in dialysis patients.
With regard to insulin therapy on dialysis versus nondi -
alysis days, the usual baseline dose is normally given, but  the 
timing of mealtime doses is often changed when dialysis alters 
the times when food is consumed.
8. E ffect of peritoneal dialysis on insulin dose . T he glucose con-
tained in peritoneal dialysate increases the need for blood 
glucose–lowering therapy, and more insulin is often required 
because of insulin resistance and the glucose load absorbed 
from the hypertonic dialysate. A 1.5-percent dextrose (glu-
cose monohydrate, MW 198) dialysate solution, for example, 
has a glucose (MW 180) concentration of 1,500 × (180/198) 
= 1,364 mg (76 mmol/L), well above that in the plasma. On 
the other hand, in some PD patients less insulin can be re-
quired than anticipated owing to decreased carbohydrate in-
take and to prolongation of the duration of action of insulin 
resulting from reduced renal and hepatic insulin clearance.
To help maintain near-normal glycemia during PD, blood 
sugar in patients treated with CAPD or APD can be controlled 
with intraperitoneal insulin, although this is now done only 
rarely. Use of the intraperitoneal route has the advantages of a 
continuous or nearly continuous presence of insulin, elimina-
tion of the need for injections, and a more physiologic route 
of insulin supply to the liver via the portal vein, mimicking 
the way that pancreatic insulin reaches the liver (Tzamalou-
kas, 1991). Disadvantages are the potential for bacterial con -
tamination of dialysate during injection of insulin into the 
bags, need for somewhat higher daily total insulin doses due 
to losses of insulin with the spent dialysate, and, perhaps of 
greatest concern, the risk of peritoneal fibroblastic prolifera -
tion and hepatic subcapsular steatosis (Maxwell, 1991). If in-
traperitoneal insulin is used, it is recommended that a long, 
3.8-cm (1.5 in) needle be used to ensure that the full dose of 
insulin is injected into the dialysis solution container rather 
than being trapped in the infusion port; the dialysis solution 
container should be inverted several times after injection to 
ensure proper mixing. For intraperitoneal insulin protocols, 
please refer to previous editions of this Handbook.
It is important to remember that icodextrin and malt -
ose, which are contained in some PD solutions, can interfere 
with, or cause falsely elevated glucose results with, some self-  
monitoring methods, possibly leading to inappropriate ther -
apy (Tsai, 2010; Firanek, 2013).
9. Use of an insulin infusion pump.  I n fragile type 1 diabetic pa-
tients where frequent hypoglycemia is a problem, continu-
ous subcutaneous insulin injection can be of benefit. In 
such cases, the insulin infusion may be shut off 1 hour or so 
prior to HD and resumed shortly after the dialysis session is 
completed (Atherton, 2004).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   563 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
564
C. Oral hypoglycemic agents and noninsulin injectable agents.  These 
agents are useful adjuncts in the treatment of diabetic pa-
tients and are used by many nephrologists. Suggested agents 
and appropriate doses are listed in Table 32.2. In a 2010 survey 
of U.S. dialysis patients with diabetes, 80% were recorded as 
receiving some form of glycemic therapy, and of these, 49/80 
were being managed with insulin alone, 8/80 with insulin plus 
some form of oral medication, and 23/80 with an oral agent 
only. Of the oral agents being used in 2010, the great major -
ity were either sulfonylureas or thiazolidinediones, although 
this may change as more information and experience with the 
newer agents become available.
1. Sulfonylureas. Su lfonylureas are insulin secretagogues that 
bind to the sulfonylurea receptor, a part of the potassium 
channel, on pancreatic β cells. They cause potassium chan-
nel closure with subsequent membrane depolarization, 
which, in turn, causes opening of voltage-gated calcium 
channels. This allows for a sudden increase in intracellu-
lar calcium, which causes preformed insulin to be released 
from intracellular secretory granules. First generation 
sulfonylureas (acetohexamide, chlorpropamide, tolaza -
mide, and tolbutamide) are almost never used anymore. 
The second generation drugs (glipizide, glyburide, and 
glimepiride) are still fairly widely employed. All the sec -
ond generation sulfonylureas undergo hepatic metabolism 
with a variable percentage of renal excretion (Spiller, 2006). 
Glyburide and glimepiride have active metabolites with 
relatively long half-lives that are renally excreted and so are 
not recommended for end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) pa-
tients. The metabolite of glipizide has little or no hypogly-
cemic activity and a short half-life of 2–4 hours. Therefore, 
even though its renal excretion is high (80%–85%), glipizide 
is the sulfonylurea of choice in dialysis patients. However, 
sulfonylureas as a class show a relatively high incidence 
of hypoglycemia, plus many drugs frequently used in di-
alysis patients can either antagonize (phenytoin, nicotinic 
acid, diuretics) or enhance (salicylates, warfarin, ethanol) 
the hypoglycemic action of sulfonylureas. Another reason 
that sulfonylureas are not optimal in the ESKD population 
is that their mechanism of action ( facilitating insulin re-
lease) presupposes that the individual being treated is still 
producing some endogenous insulin. In people with type 2 
diabetes, endogenous insulin, assessed by C-peptide mea-
surements, was highest in people with recently diagnosed 
disease and progressively decreased in people as the dura-
tion of diabetes increased. (Duckworth, 2011). Since most 
people on dialysis will have had diabetes for a fairly long 
time, many will be producing little or no endogenous insu-
lin and so will be unable to respond to sulfonylureas.
2. Metformin. M etformin, a member of the biguanide class, 
is perhaps the most widely used oral agent to treat type 2 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   564 11/10/14   3:42 am
565Chapter 32 / Diabetes
Drug Usual Nonuremic Dose
Dialysis Patient Dose 
(% of Nonuremic Dose)
Insulins
Short-acting
Regular 0.2–1 units/kg/d SC 
b.i.d.–q.i.d.
Decrease dose 
(25%–50%)
Lispro 0.2–1 units/kg/d SC 
b.i.d.–q.i.d.
Decrease dose 
(25%–50%)
Aspart 0.2–1 units/kg/d SC 
b.i.d.–q.i.d.
Decrease dose (not 
defined)
Intermediate-acting
NPH 0.2–1 units/kg/d SC 
q24h–b.i.d.
Decrease dose (not 
defined)
Long-acting
Glargine 0.1–1 units/kg/d SC q24h Decrease dose (not 
defined)
Detemir 0.1–1 units/kg/d SC q24h Decrease dose (not 
defined)
Sulfonylureas
Glipizide 2.5–20 mg PO q24h–b.i.d. 2.5–10 mg PO q24h–
b.i.d. (50%)
Glimeperide 1–8 mg PO q24h 1–4 mg PO q24h (50%)
Tolbutamide 250–3,000 mg PO q24h Same (100%)
Glyburide 1.25–10 mg PO q24h Avoid in renal failure
Thiazolidinedionesa
Rosiglitazone 4–8 mg PO q24h–b.i.d. Same (100%)
Pioglitazone 15–30 mg PO q24h Same (100%)
a-Glucosidase inhibitors
Acarbose 50–100 mg PO t.i.d. Not recommended in 
renal failure
Miglitol 50–100 mg PO t.i.d. Not recommended in 
renal failure
Meglitinides
Repaglinide 0.5–8 mg PO t.i.d. 0.5–4 mg PO t.i.d. (50%)
Nateglinide 60–120 mg PO t.i.d. Avoid in renal failure
Biguanides
Metformin 850–2,550 mg PO 
q24h–b.i.d.
Avoid in renal failure
Amylin analogs
Pramlintide 30–120 mcg SC q.a.c. Same (100%). No data 
on dialysis patients
SGLT-2 inhibitor
Canagliflozin 100 mg–300 mg q24h If eGFR 45 to <60 mL/
min/1.73 m2, 100 mg
Avoid if eGFR <45 mL/
min/1.73 m2
Agents for Diabetes Mellitus in Chronic Kidney Disease
32.2
TABLE
(continued)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   565 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
566
Drug Usual Nonuremic Dose
Dialysis Patient Dose 
(% of Nonuremic Dose)
DPP-4 inhibitors
Sitagliptin 100 mg q24h If eGFR ≥30 mL/
min/1.73 m2
and <50 mL/min/ 
1.73 m2, 50 mg (50%) 
If eGFR <30 mL/
min/1.73 m2, 25 mg
(25%)
Saxagliptin 2.5–5 mg q24h If eGFR <50 L/
min/1.73 m2, 2.5 mg
(50%)
Linagliptin 5 mg q24h Same
Alogliptin 25 mg q24h If eGFR ≥30 mL/
min/1.73 m2
and <50 mL/ 
min/1.73 m2, 12.5 mg 
(50%)
If eGFR <30 mL/
min/1.73 m2, 6.25 mg
(25%)
GLP-1 receptor agonists
Exenatide 2 mg weekly SC
Up to 10 mcg b.i.d. SC
Avoid if eGFR <30 mL/
min/1.73 m2
Liraglutide Up to 1.8 mg q24h SC Limited experience with 
advanced renal disease; 
caution advised
aMay cause fluid retention in chronic kidney disease patients not on dialysis.
SC, subcutaneously; b.i.d., two times per day; q.i.d., four times per day; q24h, daily; PO, by mouth; 
t.i.d., three times per day; q.a.c., before meals.
Agents for Diabetes Mellitus in Chronic Kidney Disease 
(continued)32.2
TABLE
diabetes in patients with normal renal function and has sev-
eral distinct advantages. Metformin use is associated with 
a very low incidence of hypoglycemia, weight loss  instead 
of weight gain, and a favorable effect on serum  lipids. Its 
mechanism of action is to acutely decrease  hepatic glucose 
production by transiently inhibiting the respiratory enzyme 
chain in mitochondria. However, metformin has been asso-
ciated with the rare complication of life-  threatening lactic 
acidosis. The causation of this association is not completely 
clear, and acidosis is most commonly seen in patients with 
substantial comorbidity, but patients with markedly re -
duced renal function are at increased risk. Metformin is not 
metabolized, and 90% is excreted as the  active drug by the 
kidneys (Spiller, 2006). Plasma metformin levels are thus 
substantially higher in patients with reduced creatinine 
clearance (Lipska, 2011). There is controversy  regarding the 
safety of use in patients with nondialysis CKD; in the United 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   566 11/10/14   3:42 am
567Chapter 32 / Diabetes
States, the drug label warns against use of metformin when 
serum creatinine is greater than 1.5 mg/dL (130 mcmol/L) 
in males or 1.4 mg/dL (124 mcmol/L) in females, whereas 
there are studies suggesting that metformin can be used 
with relative safety down to a GFR of 45 mL/min. Metfor -
min should not be used in dialysis patients.
3. α-Glycosidase inhibitors. T here are two α-glucosidase inhibi-
tors available in the United States : acarbose and miglitol. 
They work by competitively and reversibly inhibiting gut 
enzymes that mediate the intestinal breakdown of oli-
gosaccharides into simple sugars, thereby limiting their 
 absorption. Postprandial glucose surges are reduced with -
out stimulation of endogenous insulin, and, thus, the risk of 
hypoglycemia is relatively low. Little acarbose is absorbed, 
but it is extensively metabolized in the gut, and about 
one-third of the metabolites, some active, are absorbed 
(Spiller, 2006; Reilly, 2010). In patients with reduced renal 
function, the plasma levels of acarbose and its metabo-
lites can increase. Miglitol  is absorbed to a greater extent 
than acarbose. Miglitol is not metabolized and is excreted 
 unchanged in the urine (Spiller, 2006; Reilly, 2010). Neither 
acarbose nor miglitol has been well studied in patients in 
whom eGFR is less than 25 mL/min per 1.73 m 2, and, in 
general, their use is not recommended in dialysis patients.
4. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) agonists.  P PAR- γ 
agonists include drugs such as rosiglitazone and pioglitazone. 
These drugs sensitize target tissues to insulin,  increase glucose 
uptake in muscle and adipose tissue, and decrease hepatic glu-
cose production. They may also have beneficial anti-inflam-
matory, vascular, and metabolic  (hypolipidemic) effects.
Pioglitazone i s metabolized primarily by the liver. It has 
been found to be safe and effective as monotherapy and 
add-on therapy to other oral antidiabetic agents in patients 
on HD when studied up to 96 weeks (Abe, 2010). There is no 
need for dose reduction. Pioglitazone has been associated 
with bladder cancer. In the United States, it carries a warn-
ing to avoid use in patients with active bladder cancer and 
to consider risks versus benefits prior to initiating therapy 
in patients with a history of bladder cancer.
Like pioglitazone, rosiglitazone  is metabolized 
 primarily by the liver. Rosiglitazone was effective at all 
 degrees of renal function (Chapelsky, 2003). One group 
found an increase in interdialysis weight on rosiglitazone, 
but this study lacked a true control group (Chiang, 2007). 
There was no meaningful change in the pharmacokinetics 
of the drug in patients on HD, and there was no difference 
in plasma drug levels on dialysis compared with nondialy-
sis days (Thompson-Culkin, 2002), suggesting no need for 
dosage adjustment because of altered renal function. How-
ever, in one study in patients on CAPD, the half-life of rosi-
glitazone was increased compared with healthy volunteers 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   567 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
568
(Aramwit, 2008). In 2007, a review of a variety of sources of 
available data linked rosiglitazone with an increased risk of 
myocardial infarction and cardiovascular death, and its use 
has been restricted in the United States (Nissen, 2007). This 
restriction was partially lifted by the U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA) in November of 2013, but rosiglitazone 
remains suspended from the market in Europe and a num-
ber of other countries. Both pioglitazone and rosiglitazone 
have been associated with weight gain, edema, and conges-
tive heart failure in nonuremic patients; the mechanism 
is thought to be increased renal retention of sodium and 
water. Acute myopathy has been reported when glitazones 
were given in conjunction with fibrates.
5. Meglitinides. Repaglinide i s a member of the meglitinide fam-
ily of compounds and acts as an insulin secretagogue. It 
binds to the sulfonylurea receptor and functions in a man-
ner similar to the sulfonylureas , but it has an additional 
β cell binding site and thus a different binding profile 
(Hatorp, 2002). It differs from the sulfonylureas  in several 
ways. First, it has a much shorter duration of action with a 
half-life of 1–1.5 hours with somewhat less hypoglycemic 
risk than SUs. Second, it is eliminated almost entirely by he-
patic metabolism with biliary or fecal excretion of mainly 
inactive metabolites. Only 8% is excreted in urine. Like SUs, 
it is highly protein bound. Several studies have examined 
the impact of renal disease on repaglinide pharmacokinet -
ics (Marbury, 2000; Schumacher, 2001; Hatorp, 2002). In 
general, there is no impact with moderate renal disease. 
However, with more severe renal disease (GFR < 30 mL/
min), the “area under the curve ” of the plasma level of the 
drug was higher because of increased elimination half life. 
Despite these findings, there was little difference in hypo-
glycemia, and repaglinide is not contraindicated in people 
with renal disease but should be used with caution, starting 
at a low dose (0.5 mg) and titrating upward slowly. Stud-
ies were not conducted in patients with eGFR <20 mL/min 
per 1.73 m 2 or in patients with renal failure requiring di -
alysis. Like the SUs, it may not be effective if the individual 
being treated can no longer generate endogenous insulin.
In contrast to repaglinide, which has primarily fecal ex-
cretion, nateglinide, another meglitinide, is 90% excreted 
by the kidney, primarily as active metabolites (Spiller, 
2006; Reilly, 2010). Use of nateglinide in patients on dialysis 
should thus be avoided or done with the greatest caution.
6. Glucagon-like peptide-1(GLP-1) receptor agonists . T here are two 
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists avail-
able, exenatide (which comes in both twice-per-day and 
once-per-week formulations) and liraglutide. GLP-1  is a 
naturally occurring gut peptide made and secreted by co-
lonic L-cells in response to meals. It has multiple actions, 
including stimulation of endogenous insulin secretion, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   568 11/10/14   3:42 am
569Chapter 32 / Diabetes
inhibition of endogenous glucagon secretion, delay of gas-
tric emptying, and inhibition of appetite. The effects on 
insulin and glucagon are glucose-dependent, that is, they 
occur only in the presence of hyperglycemia. These actions 
result in improved glucose control with little hypoglycemic 
risk (as monotherapy) and weight loss. GLP-1 is rapidly de-
graded by dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4). However, both 
exenatide and liraglutide are degradation-resistant and 
undergo little systemic metabolism.
Exenatide i s excreted mainly by the kidneys. The half-
life increases with decreasing renal function. Exenatide 
was generally well tolerated in the mild and moderate renal 
insufficiency without dose adjustment, but not in subjects 
with ESKD due to nausea and vomiting (Linnebjerg, 2007). 
Its use is not recommended for those with eGFR <30 mL/
min per 1.73 m 2. Caution is also advised for people who 
have received kidney transplants. Exenatide caused an 
increased incidence in thyroid C-cell tumors at clinically 
relevant exposures in rats compared with controls. It is un-
known whether it causes thyroid C-cell tumors in humans, 
including medullary thyroid carcinoma; nonetheless, it is 
contraindicated in patients with a personal or family his -
tory of medullary thyroid carcinoma and in patients with 
multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 2. Pancreati -
tis has been identified in postmarketing studies as a pos-
sible adverse consequence of exenatide use.
In contrast to exenatide, only about 6% of liraglutide 
(as metabolites) is excreted by the kidneys; the pharmacoki-
netics of the drug is little altered by kidney disease  (Jacobsen, 
2009). However, there is increased incidence of nausea in 
those with eGFR <60 mL/min per 1.73 m2, though the num-
ber of people studied was small (Davidson, 2011). No dose ad-
justment is required in US labeling, but it should be used with 
caution in people with advanced kidney impairment because 
of limited experience. Liraglutide carries the same warnings 
as exenatide with regard to medullary thyroid cancer, mul-
tiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 2, and pancreatitis.
7. Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors.  T here are four DPP-4 
inhibitors now available in the United States : sitagliptin, 
saxagliptin, linagliptin, and alogliptin. As a group, they act 
by inhibiting the enzyme (DPP-4), which rapidly degrades 
endogenous incretin hormones. The major incretin is 
 glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), a gut hormone that stimu-
lates insulin, suppresses glucagon, delays gastric emptying, 
and decreases appetite.
Approximately 75%–80% of an oral dose of sitagliptin 
is excreted unchanged in the urine, and sitagliptin levels 
markedly increase with declining renal function (Bergman, 
2007). Because of this, it is recommended that the dose be 
adjusted on the basis of eGFR. A 100-mg daily dose can be 
given if eGFR is >50 mL/min per 1.73 m2. This dose should 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   569 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
570
be reduced to 50 mg if eGFR falls below 50 mL/min per 1.73 
m2, and to 25 mg daily if eGFR is below 30 mL/min per 1.73 
m2 or if the patient is on dialysis (Arjona Ferreira, 2013). 
At these reduced doses, sitagliptin was similarly effective in 
improving glycemic control as glipizide with less severe hy-
poglycemia (0% vs. 7.7%) in patients on dialysis. These find-
ings confirm an earlier study in which hypoglycemia was 
much less common with sitagliptin (4.6% of the patients 
treated with sitagliptin compared with 23% of those treated 
with glipizide) (Chan, 2008). The fraction removed by HD is 
relatively small, 13% and 4%, for HD initiated 4 or 48 hours 
postdose, respectively, so that sitagliptin can be adminis-
tered without regard to the timing of HD (Bergman, 2007).
Saxagliptin, t he second DPP-4 inhibitor to reach market, 
has a major active metabolite 5-hydroxy saxagliptin, which 
is about half as potent as the parent compound (Boulton, 
2011). About 75% is excreted in the urine; 24% is saxagliptin 
and 36% is 5-hydroxy saxagliptin and minor metabolites. 
Levels of saxagliptin and 5-hydroxy saxagliptin rise with the 
degree of renal impairment with the metabolite rising to a 
greater degree than saxagliptin itself. Because of this, a dos-
age adjustment is advised. A full 5-mg dose of saxagliptin can 
be used if eGFR is greater than 50 mL/min per 1.73 m, 2 but 
dose should be reduced to 2.5 mg daily for lower eGFR. In-
terestingly, in patients on HD, saxagliptin concentrations are 
slightly lower than in healthy subjects, but 5-hydroxy saxa-
gliptin is much higher. It has been speculated that this may 
be due to the efficient removal of saxagliptin by HD. Because 
4 hours of HD removes about 23% of saxagliptin, it should 
be given after dialysis sessions. Saxagliptin was superior to 
placebo in improving glycemic control in those with mod-
erate or severe renal insufficiency, but saxagliptin was no 
better than placebo in those with ESKD (Nowicki, 2011). The 
percentage of patients with hypoglycemic events was simi-
lar between those treated with saxagliptin (28%) and those 
treated with placebo (29%) (Nowicki, 2011).
The elimination of the third available DPP-4 inhibitor, 
linagliptin, is not dependent on the kidney. Renal excre-
tion of unchanged linagliptin is less than 7%, and the degree 
of renal impairment does not affect linagliptin concentra -
tions. Its 5-mg daily dose does not need to be adjusted in 
renal disease (Graefe-Mody, 2011). However, experience in 
people with advanced renal disease is limited
About 10%–20% of alogliptin is metabolized by the 
liver to compounds with little pharmacological activity. 
Approximately 63% is excreted unchanged by the kidney. 
Alogliptin doses should be reduced by one-half of the stan-
dard dose (to 12.5 mg/day) for patients with eGFR between 
30 and 50 mL/min per 1.73 m 2, and by three-quarters (to 
6.25 mg/day) in those with eGFR < 30 mL/min per 1.73 m2 
or ESKD requiring HD (Golightly, 2012).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   570 11/10/14   3:42 am
571Chapter 32 / Diabetes
Safety concerns have been raised with the incretin cat-
egory of antidiabetic agents relating to a pancreatic safety 
signal associated with incretin-based medications. The U.S. 
FDA and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) working 
in parallel reviewed nonclinical toxicology studies, clinical 
trial data, and epidemiologic data relating to these medica-
tions. Both agencies agreed and published that assertions 
concerning a causal association between incretin-based 
medications and pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer were 
inconsistent with their review (Egan, 2014).
8. Sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor . Canagliflozin and 
dapaglifozin are sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibi-
tors. These medications lower the renal threshold for glu-
cose, cause an osmotic diuresis by increasing urinary 
glucose excretion, and thereby decrease plasma glucose in 
hyperglycemic patients. Because of their urine-dependent 
mechanism of action, these medications are not effective 
in patients with severe renal impairment.
9. Pramlintide. P ramlintide is a synthetic analog of human am-
ylin. Amylin is a naturally occurring hormone synthesized 
by pancreatic β cells that is co-secreted with insulin in re-
sponse to food intake. Pramlintide, like amylin, prevents 
the postprandial rise in glucagon and increases satiety, 
thus decreasing caloric intake. Pramlintide also slows gas -
tric emptying. It is metabolized mainly by the kidneys to an 
active metabolite. There is no need for dosage adjustment 
in patients with renal impairment down to an eGFR of 20 
mL/min per 1.73 m2. There are few or no data on its use in 
patients on dialysis.
 V. HYPERKALEMIA. H yperkalemia occurs commonly in diabetic pa -
tients treated by maintenance HD. The causal factors include in-
sulin deficiency and resistance (resulting in impaired potassium 
uptake by cells), aldosterone deficiency (resulting in impaired co-
lonic and residual renal excretion), metabolic acidosis (resulting 
in increased proton–potassium exchange across cells), admin-
istration of other drugs that can cause hyperkalemia, intracel -
lular to extracellular fluid shifts due to hyperglycemia (resulting 
in movement of water accompanied by potassium out of cells), 
and excesses in dietary potassium intake. Severe hyperkalemia is 
much less frequently found in diabetic patients on maintenance 
PD. Treatment in diabetic patients generally does not differ 
from that in the general dialysis population, and is discussed in 
 Chapters 10 and 11.
 VI. CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE AND HYPERTENSION
A. Hypertension. T he incidence of hypertension is high in dia-
betic dialysis patients. Control of high blood pressure is very 
important for the prevention of cardiovascular sequelae and 
deterioration of vision. Most diabetics have volume-sensitive 
hypertension that can be controlled by appropriate sodium 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   571 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
572
and fluid restriction and by removal of excess extracellular 
fluid by dialysis. The treatment of hypertension in diabetic 
dialysis patients is similar to that for all such patients, and is 
discussed in detail in Chapter 33.
B. Coronary artery disease . Despite the increased prevalence of 
diabetic patients, outcomes of coronary artery bypass grafting 
have continuously improved in dialysis patients. Nonetheless, 
mortality rates remain almost threefold higher compared with 
non-ESKD patients (Parikh, 2010). See Chapter 38.
C. Peripheral vascular disease.  D iabetic patients on dialysis have a 
very high rate of amputation (O’Hare, 2003). Frequent exami-
nation of the feet by a podiatrist is important; with regular 
care focused on prevention of ulcer development, the risk of 
amputation can be minimized.
 VII. CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE.  T he incidence of stroke is higher 
in diabetic dialysis patients than in their nondiabetic counter -
parts. Although the use of aspirin has been shown to reduce the 
risk of stroke in nonuremic patients, the benefit of such therapy 
in diabetic dialysis patients is unknown, and the use of aspirin 
theoretically increases the risk of intraocular hemorrhage. Cou-
marin anticoagulants also increase bleeding risk in this popula -
tion more than in nonuremic diabetic patients and are associated 
with additional risks of vascular calcification and calciphylaxis.
 VIII. EYE PROBLEMS IN DIABETICS ON DIALYSIS
A. Diabetic retinopathy. Ret inopathy is present in almost all type 1 
diabetic patients with ESKD. In such patients, another cause 
of kidney disease should be sought if the retinal examination 
(including fluorescein angiography) is normal. The situation 
in type 2 diabetic patients is not as clear. In one study, diabetic 
retinopathy was present in only 15 of 27 patients (56%) with 
biopsy-proven diabetic glomerulosclerosis (Parving, 1992). 
In another biopsy study, a close correlation was observed be-
tween the presence of severe retinopathy and Kimmelsteil–
Wilson nodules on biopsy, whereas those without retinopathy 
had mesangial sclerosis but not nodular sclerosis. Thus, the 
presence of retinopathy appears to increase the likelihood of 
more severe renal lesions (Schwartz, 1998).
Hypertension, which is also present in the majority of di-
alysis patients, accelerates progression of diabetic retinopathy, 
and may by itself, cause retinal and vitreous hemorrhage. Vas-
cular events secondary to hypertensive retinopathy (branch 
retinal vein occlusion from obstruction at the site of arteriove-
nous crossings) can cause sudden decreases in vision. Control 
of hypertension may prevent this complication, as well as the 
more rare central retinal vein and artery occlusion.
Retinopathy ultimately progresses to a proliferative stage 
believed to be secondary to local hypoxia and characterized by 
intense proliferation of new blood vessels in the retina. These 
vessels, which are located in the surface layer of the retina, cause 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   572 11/10/14   3:42 am
573Chapter 32 / Diabetes
loss of vision through vitreous bleeding, and by causing macular 
distortion or detachment. Discovery of proliferative retinopathy 
is an indication for laser treatment, which decreases the risk of 
detachment and the need for oxygen (by destroying nonessen-
tial parts of the retina). Vitreous hemorrhages from proliferative 
retinopathy obstruct the path of light and may lead to retinal 
detachment and blindness. Vitrectomy and other microsurgi-
cal techniques (removal of retinal membranes, reattachment of 
retina) can improve vision in one-third to one-half of patients. 
Evidence is accumulating for a role for inhibitors of vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in this condition (Osaadon, 
2014). Active collaboration with an ophthalmologist skilled in 
laser photocoagulation is necessary. Most diabetic patients with 
ESKD have retinopathy by the time dialysis is initiated. Addi-
tional laser therapy and regular screening for glaucoma are vital 
components of comprehensive care for diabetic dialysis patients.
B. Other eye problems.  D iabetic patients on dialysis are subject 
to other eye complications common to all patients on dialy -
sis. Conjunctivitis and keratitis  are treated with ophthal -
mic preparations of antibiotic, antifungal, or antiviral agents 
in the usual doses. The dose of antibiotics given system-
atically should be adjusted for dialysis. Band keratopathy  
 (corneal– conjunctival calcification) may afflict both diabetic 
and nondiabetic dialysis patients who have uncontrolled hy -
perphosphatemia. A “ red-eye syndrome” due to irritation of 
the conjunctiva by calcium phosphate deposits may compli-
cate band keratopathy. Superficial keratectomy or chelation of 
the  calcium deposits with local application of ethylenediamine 
tetraacetic acid (EDTA) has been used to treat refractory cases. 
Glaucoma and cataracts in dialysis patients are treated in 
the same way as in the general population. Proactive eye sur -
veillance and intervention have been effective in sustaining at 
least ambulatory vision in nearly all diabetic dialysis patients.
 IX. IMPOTENCE. I mpotence is common in diabetic dialysis patients. 
Autonomic neuropathy and peripheral vascular disease associ-
ated with diabetes are operative, as are the usual uremic causes.
 X. REFERRAL FOR TRANSPLANTATION. I n diabetic patients in whom no 
contraindication to transplantation exists, renal transplantation 
is the preferred method of managing ESKD because of improved 
survival with transplantation (approximately 80% 3-year survival 
vs. 50% 3-year survival in patients maintained on dialysis). Among 
predialysis diabetic patients with chronic kidney disease who are 
eligible for transplantation, preemptive kidney transplantation is 
preferred to initiation of dialysis followed by transplantation. Liv-
ing donor kidneys are preferred to deceased donor kidneys. Use of 
extended donor kidneys can increase the number of diabetic di-
alysis patients undergoing successful transplantation. Screening 
coronary angiography may be necessary as part of the pretrans-
plant workup; screening dobutamine stress echocardiography, if 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   573 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
574
negative, may be sufficient in some patients (especially those not 
yet on dialysis, in whom there is a risk of contrast nephropathy).
 XI. BONE DISEASE.  A dynamic bone disease is common among dia-
betic patients with ESKD (see Chapter 36).
 XII. ANEMIA. T he response to erythropoietin is satisfactory for ane-
mic diabetics treated with either HD or PD (see Chapter 34).
 XIII. CONCLUSION. T he care of diabetic patients with ESKD is a de-
manding task. In addition to members of the dialysis team, rep-
resentatives of other specialties (e.g., vascular surgery, podiatry, 
ophthalmology, neurology, transplantation surgery) are needed. 
The existence of a diabetic team, with all of the subspecialties 
available, working under the coordination of a nephrologist and 
a nurse-specialist in diabetes is highly desirable to provide the 
best care for this population.
References and Suggested Readings
Abe M, et al. Clinical effectiveness and safety evaluation of long-term pioglitazone 
treatment for erythropoietin responsiveness and insulin resistance in type 2 dia -
betic patients on hemodialysis. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010;11:1611–1620.
Adamis AP , et al. Changes in retinal neovascularization after pegaptanib (Macugen) 
therapy in diabetic individuals. Ophthalmology. 2006;113:23–28.
Agrawal A, Sautter M, Jones N. Effects of rosiglitazone maleate when added to a sul-
fonylurea regimen in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and mild to moderate 
renal impairment: a post hoc analysis. Clin Therap. 2003;25:2754–2764.
Al-Kudsi RR, et al. Extreme hyperglycemia in dialysis patients. Clin Nephrol. 
1982;17:228–231.
Aramwit P , Supasyndh O, Sriboonruang T. Pharmacokinetics of single-dose rosigli-
tazone in chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis patients. J Clin Pharm Therap. 
2008;33:685–690.
Arjona Ferreira JC, et al. Efficacy and safety of sitagliptin in patients with type 2 dia-
betes and ESRD receiving dialysis: a 54-week randomized trial. Am J Kidney Dis . 
2013;61:579–587.
Arora SK, McFarlane SI. The case for low carbohydrate diets in diabetes management. 
Nutr Metab (Lond). 2005;2:16.
Atherton G.  Renal replacement and diabetes care: the role of a specialist nurse. J Diab 
Nursing 2004;8:70–72.
Baldwin D, et al. A randomized trial of two weight-based doses of insulin glargine 
and glulisine in hospitalized subjects with type 2 diabetes and renal insufficiency 
Diabetes Care. 2012;35:1970–1974.
Beardsworth SF, et al. Intraperitoneal insulin: a protocol for administration during 
CAPD and review of published protocols. Perit Dial Int. 1988;8:145
Bergman AJ, et al. Effect of renal insufficiency on the pharmacokinetics of sitagliptin, a 
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:1862–1864.
Boulton DW , et al. Influence of renal or hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics 
of saxagliptin. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2011;50: 253–265.
Burmeister JE, Campos JF, Miltersteiner DR. Effect of different levels of glucose in the 
dialysate on the risk of hypoglycaemia during hemodialysis in diabetic patients. J 
Bras Nefrol. 2012;34:323–327.
Castellino P , et al. Glucose and amino acid metabolism in chronic renal failure: effect 
of insulin and amino acids. Am J Physiol. 1992;262:F168–F176.
Chan JCN, et al. Safety and efficacy of sitagliptin in patients with type 2 diabetes and 
chronic renal insufficiency. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2008;10:545–555.
Chapelsky M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone in patients with varying degrees 
of renal insufficiency. J Clin Pharmacol. 2003;43:252–259.
Charpentier G, Riveline JP , Varroud-Vial M. Management of drugs affecting blood glu-
cose in diabetic patients with renal failure. Diabet Metab. 2000;26(suppl 4):73–85.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   574 11/10/14   3:42 am
575Chapter 32 / Diabetes
Chiang C, et al. Rosiglitazone in diabetes control in hemodialysis patients with and 
without viral hepatitis infection effectiveness and side effects. Diabetes Care. 
2007;30:3–7.
Cooper BA, et al. The IDEAL Study : a randomized, controlled trial of early versus late 
initiation of dialysis. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:609–619.
Czock D, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of lispro-insulin in hemodi-
alysis patients with diabetes mellitus. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2003;41:492–497.
Daniels ID, Markell MS. Blood glucose control in diabetics: II. Semin Dial. 1993;6:394.
Danne T, Bolinder J. New insulins and insulin therapy. Diabetes Care. 2011;34:661–665.
Dasgupta MK. Management of patients with type 2 diabetes on peritoneal dialysis. Adv 
Perit Dial. 2005;21:120–122.
Davidson J, et al. Mild renal impairment has no effect on the efficacy and safety of 
liraglutide. Endocr Pract. 2011;17:345–355.
DeFronzo RA, et al. Glucose intolerance in uremia. Quantification of pancreatic beta 
cell sensitivity to glucose and tissue sensitivity to insulin. J Clin Invest. 1978;62:425–
435.
Duckworth W , et al; for the VADT Investigators. The duration of diabetes affects the 
response to intensive glucose control in type 2 subjects: the VA Diabetes Trial.  
J Diabetes Complications. 2011;25:355–361.
Egan AG, et al. Pancreatic safety of incretin-based drugs—FDA and EMA assessment 
N Engl J Med. 2014;370:794–797.
Firanek CA, Jacob DT, Sloand JA. Avoidable iatrogenic hypoglycemia in patients on 
peritoneal dialysis: the risks of nonspecific glucose monitoring devices and drug-
device interaction. J Patient Saf. 2013 Sep 27.
Flynn CT. The Iowa Lutheran protocol. Perit Dial Bull. 1981;1:100.
Goldberg T, et al. Advanced glycoxidation end products in commonly consumed foods. 
J Am Diet Assoc. 2004;104:1287–1291.
Golightly LK, Drayna CC, McDermott MT. Comparative clinical pharmacokinetics of 
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2012;5:501–514.
Graefe-Mody U, et al. Effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of the di -
peptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor linagliptin. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011;13:939–946.
Graham GG, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of metformin. Clin Pharmacokinet . 
2011;50:81–98.
Hatorp V . Clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of repaglinide [Review]. 
Clin Pharmacokinet. 2002;41:471–483.
Iglesias P , Diez JJ. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists in renal 
disease. Eur J Endocrinol. 2006;154:613–621.
Jackson MA, et al. Hemodialysis-induced hypoglycemia in diabetic patients. Clin 
Nephrol. 2000;54:30–34.
Jacobsen L, et al. Effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of the GLP-1 
analogue liraglutide. Br J Clin Pharm. 2009;68:898–905.
K/DOQI Workgroup. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for cardiovascular disease in 
dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2005;45(suppl 3):S1.
Khanna R, et al. The Toronto Western Hospital protocol. Perit Dial Bull. 1981;1:101.
Legrain M, Rottembourg J. The “Pitie-Salpetriere” protocol. Perit Dial Bull. 1981;1:101.
Lin CL, et al. Improvement of clinical outcomes by early nephrology referral in type II 
diabetics on hemodialysis. Ren Fail. 2003;25:455–464.
Linnebjerg H, et al. Effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of exenatide. 
Br J Clin Pharm. 2007;64:317–327.
Lipska KJ, Bailey CJ, Inzucchi SE. Use of metformin in the setting of mild-to-moderate 
renal insufficiency. Diabetes Care. 2011;34:1431–1437.
List JF, et al. Sodium-glucose co-transport inhibition with dapagliflozin in type 2 dia-
betes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:650–657.
Little R, et al. Can glycohemoglobin be used to assess glycemic control in patients with 
chronic renal failure? Clin Chem. 2002;48:784–785.
Locatelli F, Pozzoni P , Del Vecchio L. Renal replacement therapy in patients with diabe-
tes and end-stage renal disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004;(suppl 1):S25–S29.
Marbury T, Ruckle J, Hatorp V . Pharmacokinetics of repaglinide in subjects with renal 
impairment. Clin Pharmacol Therap. 2000;67:7–15.
Maxwell R, et al. Insulin influence on the mitogenic-induced effect of the peritoneal 
effluent in CAPD patients. In: Khanna R, et al., eds. Advances in Peritoneal Dialysis. 
Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press; 1991:161–164.
McCormack J, Johns K, Tildesley H. Metformin’s contraindications should be contrain-
dicated. CMAJ. 2005;173:502–504.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   575 11/10/14   3:42 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
576
Murphy DM, et al. Reducing hyperglycemia hospitalwide: the basal-bolus concept. Jt 
Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2009;35:216–23.
Nakamoto H, et al. Effect of diabetes on peritoneal function assessed by peritoneal 
dialysis capacity test in patients undergoing CAPD. Am J Kidney Dis. 2002;40:1045–
1054.
Ng JM, et al. The effect of iron and erythropoietin treatment on the A1C of patients 
with diabetes and chronic kidney disease. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:2310–2313.
Nissen S, Wolsky K. Effect of rosiglitazone on the risk of myocardial infarction and 
death from cardiovascular causes. N Eng J Med. 2007;356:2457–2471.
Nowicki M, et al. Long-term treatment with the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibi-
tor saxagliptin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and renal impairment: 
a randomised controlled 52-week efficacy and safety study. Int J Clin Pract. 
2011;65:1232–1239.
O’Hare AM, et al. Factors associated with future amputation among patients undergo-
ing hemodialysis: results from the Dialysis Morbidity and Mortality Study Waves 3 
and 4. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;41:162–170.
Oomichi T, et al. Impact of glycemic control on survival of diabetic patients on chronic 
regular hemodialysis: a 7-year observational study. Diabetes Care. 2006;29:1496–
1500.
Osaadon P , et al. A review of anti-VEGF agents forproliferative diabetic retinopathy. 
Eye (Lond) 2014;28:510–520.
Parikh DS, et al. Perioperative outcomes among patients with end-stage renal disease 
following coronary artery bypass surgery in the USA. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2010;25:2275–2283.
Parving HH, et al. Prevalence and causes of albuminuria in non-insulin-dependent 
diabetic patients. Kidney Int. 1992;41:758–762.
Phakdeekitcharoen B, Leelasa-nguan P . Effects of an ACE inhibitor or angioten-
sin receptor blocker on potassium in CAPD patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004;44:  
738–746.
Quellhorst E. Insulin therapy during peritoneal dialysis: pros and cons of various forms 
of administration. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2002;13(suppl 1):S92–S96.
Raimann JG, et al. Metabolic effects of dialyzate glucose in chronic hemodialysis: 
results from a prospective, randomized crossover trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2012;27:1559–1568.
Reilly JB, Berns JS. Selection and dosing of medications for management of diabetes in 
patients with advanced kidney disease. Semin Dial. 2010;23:163–168.
Schomig M, et al. The diabetic foot in the dialyzed patient. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2000;11:1153–1159.
Schumacher S, et al. Single- and multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of repaglinide 
in patients with type 2 diabetes and renal impairment. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 
2001;52:147–152.
Schwartz MM, et al. Renal pathology patterns in type II diabetes mellitus: relation-
ship with retinopathy. The Collaborative Study Group. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
1998;13:2547–52.
Shurraw S, et al. Glycemic control and the risk of death in 1,484 patients receiving 
maintenance hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;55:875–884.
Sloan L, et al. Efficacy and safety of sitagliptin in patients with type 2 diabetes and 
ESRD receiving dialysis: a 54-week randomized trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;61:  
579–587.
Snyder RW , Berns JS. Use of insulin and oral hypoglycemic medications in patients 
with diabetes mellitus and advanced kidney disease. Semin Dial. 2004;17:365–370.
Spiller HA, Sawyer TS. Toxicology of oral antidiabetic medications. Am J Health-Syst 
Pharm. 2006;63:929–938.
St Peter W , Weinhandl ED, Flessner MF. Sitagliptin—another option for managing type 
2 diabetes in dialysis patients? Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;61:532–535.
Thompson-Culkin K, et al. Pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone in patients with end-
stage renal disease. J Int Med Res. 2002;30:391–399.
Tsai CY, et al. False elevation of blood glucose levels measured by GDH-PQQ-based 
glucometers occurs during all daily dwells in peritoneal dialysis patients using 
icodextrin. Perit Dial Int. 2010;30:329–335.
Tzamaloukas AH, Oreopoulos DG. Subcutaneous versus intraperitoneal insulin in the 
management of diabetics on CAPD: a review. Adv Perit Dial. 1991;7:81–85.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   576 11/10/14   3:42 am
577Chapter 32 / Diabetes
Tzamaloukas AH, et al. Serum tonicity, extracellular volume and clinical manifesta-
tions in symptomatic dialysis-associated hyperglycemia treated only with insulin. 
Int J Artif Organs. 2004;27:751–758.
Uribarri J, et al. Diet-derived advanced glycation end products are major contributors 
to the body’s AGE pool and induce inflammation in healthy subjects [Review]. Ann 
N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1043:461–466.
U.S. Renal Data System. USRDS 2013 Annual Data Report: Atlas of Chronic Kidney Dis-
ease and End-Stage Renal Disease in the United States. Bethesda, MD: National 
Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-
eases; 2013.
Vonesh EF, et al. The differential impact of risk factors on mortality in hemodialysis 
and peritoneal dialysis. Kidney Int. 2004;66:2389–2401.
Williams ME, et al. Glycemic control and extended hemodialysis survival in patients 
with diabetes mellitus: comparative results of traditional and time-dependent Cox 
model analyses. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5:1595–1601.
Windus DW , et al. Prosthetic fistula survival and complications in hemodialysis pa-
tients: effects of diabetes and age. Am J Kidney Dis. 1992;19:448–452.
Yale JF. Oral antihyperglycemic agents and renal disease: new agents, new concepts 
[Review]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16(suppl 1):S7–S10.
Yale JF, et al. Efficacy and safety of canagliflozin in subjects with type 2 diabetes and 
chronic kidney disease. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2013;15:463–473.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch032.indd   577 11/10/14   3:42 am