592
34
 I. ANEMIA
A. Etiology. The anemia of chronic kidney disease (CKD) is  primarily 
due to insufficient production of the glycoprotein hormone 
erythropoietin (EPO). Although EPO can be produced in many 
of the body’s tissues, EPO required for erythropoiesis generally is 
produced by endothelial cells in proximity to the renal tubules. 
As renal excretory function is lost, there is a relative decline in 
the production of EPO that correlates with the declining glomer-
ular filtration rate. The severity of the resulting anemia varies, 
but if untreated, then hematocrit values in end-stage kidney dis-
ease (ESKD) of 18%–24% are typical. While the primacy of EPO 
deficiency is indisputable, other factors may play important 
contributory roles. Also, patients with ESKD may develop any of 
the other causes of anemia common in nonuremic subjects.
B. Consequences of anemia
1. Symptoms. The manifestations of anemia may be due both 
to the effects of decreased oxygen delivery to tissues and 
to the heart’s compensatory changes. The most prominent 
symptoms of anemia are fatigue and dyspnea. Symptoms 
develop slowly, and the patient may gradually constrict 
his or her activities in compensation. The patient’s overall 
sense of well-being is diminished. Other symptoms may 
include difficulty concentrating, dizziness, sleep disorders, 
cold intolerance, and headaches. The heart responds to di-
minished oxygen-carrying capacity of blood by attempting 
to maintain systemic oxygen delivery with increased car -
diac output and left ventricular hypertrophy. Patients may 
notice worsening dyspnea and palpitations at this stage. 
Other problems include deranged hemostatic function, 
impaired immune function, and diminished cognitive and 
sexual function. Exacerbations of angina, claudication, and 
transient ischemic attacks may also be observed.
2. Physical examination.  The primary physical examination 
 finding of anemia is pallor, which may be best detected on 
the palms of the hands, the nail beds, and the oral mucosa. 
A systolic ejection murmur due to increased cardiac flow 
may be heard over the precordium.
Hematologic 
Abnormalities
Steven Fishbane and Hitesh H. Shah
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   592 11/10/14   3:51 am
593Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
C. T reatment
1. Medications. Because EPO deficiency is the primary cause of 
anemia in patients with CKD, agents that replace erythropoi-
etin have a primary role in treatment. Since the last edition 
of this handbook, the preferred term for these agents has 
changed to erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESA). Drugs 
may be erythropoietin analogs or may stimulate erythropoi-
esis in other ways. There are many different erythropoietin 
analogs commercially available in the United States and 
elsewhere: Epoetin alfa (Epogen, Procrit) and darbepoetin 
alfa (Aranesp) are currently available in the United States, 
and methoxy-polyethyleneglycol-epoetin beta (Mircera) is 
widely used in Europe and probably will be available shortly 
in the United States. Peginesatide (Omontys) currently is 
not being marketed in the United States, after a substantial 
number of allergic reactions occurred with its use. The cause 
is currently being investigated. Epoetin alfa is a glycopro-
tein that is indistinguishable from native erythropoietin. It 
is manufactured by recombinant DNA technology and has a 
molecular weight of 30,400 Da and a circulating half-life after 
intravenous administration of approximately 8 hours. Dar-
bepoetin alfa is a synthetic analog of erythropoietin with 
increased carbohydrate content that increases the molecular 
weight by approximately 20% compared with native erythro-
poietin. As a result of the altered structure, the drug’s phar-
macokinetics are changed and the serum half-life is increased 
to approximately three times longer, 24 hours, compared with 
epoetin alfa.  Mircera has an unusually long serum half-life of 
 approximately 5.5 days. Peginesatide is a synthetic peptide 
attached to polyethylene glycol that mimics the structure of 
erythropoietin, but that has no amino acid sequence homol-
ogy to EPO. Biological analogs of ESAs, so-called biosimilars, 
have been manufactured and are in use outside of the United 
States. The safety of these agents has been variable, but under 
careful FDA scrutiny, it is likely that biosimilar forms of EPO 
will become available in the United States.
One new class of ESAs currently under development 
acts to stabilize hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF). Synthe-
sis of HIF is increased in the presence of hypoxia, and HIF 
acts to increase the transcription of EPO. HIF is rapidly de-
graded when normoxic conditions are present, and drugs 
that stabilize HIF result in increased endogenous eryth-
ropoietin production, even in anephric individuals. These 
drugs will be an important new class of ESAs if they are 
demonstrated to be safe and effective.
2. Benefits of anemia treatment with ESA.
a. Effect on outcomes.  Cross-sectional and retrospective 
studies have suggested that anemia in patients under -
going hemodialysis is associated with increased mor -
tality, particularly when the hemoglobin concentration 
is <10 g/dL (100 g/L). Analyses of large administrative 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   593 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
594
and clinical databases have shown that risk for mortal -
ity, hospitalization rate, and hospitalization days con -
tinue to decrease even at hemoglobin levels >11 g/dL 
(110 g/L). In contrast to these observational studies, 
interventional studies have not demonstrated improved 
outcomes following normalization of hemoglobin with 
ESA treatment. In fact, cardiovascular outcomes in these 
studies generally have been worse (see below).
b. Reduction in transfusion-related complications.  Prior to ESA 
therapy, up to 20% of patients on dialysis required fre-
quent transfusions with attendant risk of immediate 
transfusion reactions, viral infection, iron overload, and 
immune sensitization. The rate of blood transfusion has 
been greatly reduced by the use of ESA therapy.
c. Improved quality of life and overall sense of well-being.  Various 
assessment tools have documented an improved quality 
of life and functional status in ESKD patients treated with 
ESA. Patients feel less fatigued and their exercise capac-
ity increases. Symptoms that had been disabling in the 
pre-ESA era are now easily managed. However, the target 
level of hemoglobin for optimized quality of life is not 
completely known. Whether higher hemoglobin targets 
further improve quality of life is unclear. Some studies 
suggest that improvements may continue as hemoglo-
bin is raised toward the normal range, while others have 
found no improvement in quality of life despite higher 
hemoglobin targets.
3. Risks of ESA Therapy . Several well-powered randomized 
 controlled trials have tested the safety of ESA treatment 
aiming at relatively high hemoglobin targets (13–15 g/
dL, or 130–150 g/L) in patients with CKD. In these stud-
ies, the comparison groups (controls) were either given 
ESA treatment to a lower Hgb target or, in one study, the 
control group received mostly placebo. Four such trials 
are particularly noteworthy: the Normal Hematocrit Trial 
(Besarab, 1998), CREATE (Drueke, 2006), CHOIR (Singh, 
2006), and TREAT (Pfeffer, 2009). Only one of these four 
studies  (Besarab, 1998) was done in dialysis patients, while 
the other three recruited nondialysis CKD subjects with 
eGFR or CrCl normalized to 1.73 m 2 in the range of 15–35 
mL/min (CREATE), 15–50 (CHOIR), or 20–60 (TREAT). 
While results were somewhat inconsistent, there was a 
strong general trend toward increased cardiovascular risk, 
including risk of death, with ESA treatment to such high 
Hgb targets.
The mechanism of harm for an ESA treatment with a 
Hgb target >13 g/dL is unknown. The benefit versus risk 
of ESA treatment aiming at a lower Hgb target has not 
been formally studied in a randomized fashion. Post hoc 
analysis of these high Hgb target studies suggests that a 
higher achieved Hgb level per se may not be the source of 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   594 11/10/14   3:51 am
595Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
increased risk. In these trials, mortality was higher in those 
patients receiving high doses of ESAs; however, it is not 
at all clear whether this association was causal. Patients 
requiring high doses of ESAs, or so-called ESA-resistant 
patients, show many markers of increased illness severity 
such as cachexia and increased levels of serum inflam-
matory markers, and ESA resistance is associated with a 
poor prognosis for survival. In one of the randomized trials 
noted above (TREAT), the risk of stroke was doubled, and 
the risk of cancer was also increased in the group given an 
ESA targeting a high Hgb level. The results of these studies 
prompted the FDA to include “black box” warnings in the 
product inserts for ESAs, and for various guideline com-
mittees to revise target Hgb levels downward, with the idea 
that one should use ESAs sparingly, and attempt only par -
tial correction of anemia.
4. Indications for ESA therapy and target hemoglobin.  ESA therapy 
should generally be initiated in CKD patients when the 
Hgb falls below 10 g/dL (100 g/L). The optimal Hgb level 
for a patient with ESKD is not known. The Kidney Disease: 
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) anemia guidelines 
(2012) simply recommend that Hgb for dialysis patients 
should not exceed >11.5 g/dL (115 g/L). This recommen-
dation is in some conflict with current FDA prescribing 
instructions, which recommend holding ESA dosing when 
the hemoglobin is >11.0 g/dL (110 g/L). A reasonable he-
moglobin target for patients on dialysis would be 9.5–11.5 
g/dL (95–115 g/L).
a. Effect of volume status on target hemoglobin.  When Hgb is 
assessed prior to a hemodialysis session, extracellular 
volume tends to be high, and so due to dilution, the Hgb 
level is at a relatively low value for the week. Monday/
Tuesday predialysis Hgb levels are at their low point 
for the week and are about 0.3 g/dL (3 g/L) lower than 
midweek predialysis levels. Immediate postdialysis Hgb 
levels can be very substantially higher than predialysis 
values. So the time-averaged weekly Hgb value can be 
substantially underestimated by predialysis numbers. In 
patients with markedly fluctuating degrees of fluid over-
load, a change in predialysis Hgb may reflect a change 
in fluid status more than a change in red cell mass. This 
potential dilution issue must be kept in mind when mon-
itoring Hgb levels and using this information to adjust 
ESA dose. For the same reason, a change from a 3 per 
week to a more frequent dialysis schedule can result in 
a modest increase in Hgb that is more a reflection of 
reduced extracellular fluid volume and sampling after 
a 1-day interdialytic interval rather than to an increase 
in red cell mass. Lastly, if one is trying to parse Hgb tar -
gets from nondialysis CKD patients to patients receiving 
dialysis, a Hgb target of 11 g/dL (110 g/L) in CKD may 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   595 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
596
correspond to a somewhat lower predialysis target value 
in dialysis patients due to the dilution effect.
5. Route of administration
a. Subcutaneous versus intravenous ESAs.  The subcutaneous 
route improves the efficiency of therapy, resulting in a 
reduced dosing requirement (of about 25%) for short-
acting ESAs, specifically epoetin alfa. (Kaufman, 1998). 
When epoetin is given intravenously, its short half-life 
probably results in some drug never binding to erythro-
poietin receptors prior to clearance of epoetin from the 
circulation. When given subcutaneously, the serum half-
life of epoetin is extended, allowing for more efficient 
receptor binding and a greater erythropoietic effect. 
Despite the dose reduction advantage of subcutaneous 
administration, the majority of patients undergoing 
hemodialysis in the United States continue to be treated 
via the intravenous route. The primary reason is prob-
ably discomfort with subcutaneous injections, whereas 
reduced dosing requirements are a benefit that does not 
directly accrue to the patient. ESAs with a longer serum 
half-life provide extended time in circulation to allow 
for greater opportunity for the drug to bind to eryth-
ropoietin receptors. There is probably no advantage or 
need for subcutaneous dosing for methoxypolyethylene 
glycol-epoetin beta, peginesatide or possibly even darbe-
poetin alfa. Intravenous administration of any of these 
agents would appear to be a better choice than subcuta-
neous injection of epoetin alfa in hemodialysis patients, 
to reduce patient discomfort. For patients on peritoneal 
dialysis, subcutaneous injections remain the dominant 
route of administration.
6. Dosing
a. Initial dose.  Treatment with ESA should ideally be initi-
ated, if required, in the pre-ESKD period. If treatment 
needs to be initiated for a patient already on dialysis, 
reasonable starting doses of epoetin alfa for a hemodi-
alysis patient would be 2,000–3,000 units three times 
per week, and for a peritoneal dialysis patient 6,000 
units once per week. A typical dose of darbepoetin alfa 
would be approximately 25 mcg once weekly for a hemo-
dialysis patient or 60 mcg every 2 weeks for a patient 
on peritoneal dialysis. A typical dose of Mircera would 
be 150 mcg given once monthly. Selection of a specific 
dose requires clinical judgment as to how symptomatic 
the patient is and the starting level of hemoglobin. An 
excessively rapid rise in the hemoglobin level should be 
avoided, as this may lead to an increased risk of worsen-
ing hypertension.
b. Initial response and plateau effect.  During the initiation 
phase of therapy, hemoglobin should be checked every 
1–2 weeks, and the ESA dose adjusted as needed. It is 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   596 11/10/14   3:51 am
597Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
very common during the initiation of treatment for a 
“plateauing” of effect to occur; either the hemoglobin 
stops increasing, or escalating doses of ESA are required 
to reach therapeutic targets. This period of blunted 
response is often due to the development of iron defi-
ciency. Once the target level of hemoglobin has been 
reached, the hemoglobin should be checked every 2–4 
weeks. During this maintenance phase of therapy, the 
dose of ESA should be adjusted on the basis of subse-
quent changes in hemoglobin (Fig. 34.1).
The patient’s responsiveness to ESA should be re-
assessed on a continuing basis. Most patients will be 
responsive, with hemoglobin values consistently >10 g/
dL (100 g/L), and an epoetin dose of <5,000 units three 
times per week. In contrast, some patients will have or 
develop relative resistance to therapy. These patients 
need to be fully evaluated for causes of ESA hypore-
sponse. The responsiveness to ESA in all patients should 
be evaluated on an ongoing basis because the degree of 
responsiveness changes over time. In our experience, the 
development of resistance often signals the presence of 
iron deficiency or infection.
Check Hgb level q2–4 weeks
Has Hgb
declined by
1 g/dL?
Yes
Has Hgb
increased
by 1 g/dL?
Hgb < 9.5
g/dL
Evaluate for bleeding and
other causes of an abrupt
decline, adjust ESA dose
appropriately
Hgb 9.5–
11.5 g/dL?
Hgb >11.5
g/dL
Yes Decrease ESA dose
accordingly, consider
temporarily holding dose
1. Increase dose 25%–50%
2. Evaluate for transfusion
    need
3. Consider other
    contributing causes of
    anemia
Maintain current dose unless
trend suggests a dose
adjustment
1. Decrease dose 25%–50%
2. Hold dose if Hgb >12 g/dL
    or trend is increasing
FIGURE 34.1 Flow chart for adjusting the ESA dose based on hemoglobin (Hgb) results 
for dialysis patients.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   597 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
598
Data from ESA practice patterns in the United 
States suggest that the median weekly dose of intrave-
nous EPO is about 7,000 units per week, and for darbe-
poetin this is 25 mcg per week (Coritsidis, 2014). Side 
effects of ESA therapy have been reported in patients 
getting the high doses. ESA-resistant patients are a se-
lected group with poor outcome; however, it is possible 
that use of high doses of ESAs per se  may be associated 
with increased side effects. Response to ESAs tends to 
plateau at high doses, and use of very high doses is un-
economical. For these reasons, the 2012 KDIGO guide-
lines recommend not generally exceeding four times the 
usual baseline weight-adjusted dose of EPO when man-
aging EPO- resistant patients (KDIGO Anemia, 2012).
c. Individualized anemia management.  The pharmacodynamics 
of ESA use are complicated, as the achieved Hgb levels 
depend not only on ESA sensitivity, but on the average 
lifespan of red blood cells (RBCs) in a given patient. A 
number of algorithms have been developed with the goal 
of maximizing the time that Hgb remains in a desired 
range. Algorithms in development may be enhanced 
by estimates of Hgb measured during each dialysis ses-
sion by use of optical or ultrasound blood line sensors. 
The use of such algorithms has been reported to reduce 
Hgb variability as well as overall ESA dose (Lines, 2012; 
Gaweda, 2014).
D. Side effects of ESA therapy . See Section 3, above, for a discussion 
of cardiovascular risks of ESA therapy.
1. W orsening of hypertension.  This is a common problem dur -
ing the partial correction of anemia with ESA therapy. In 
some patients, there will be a need to increase antihyper -
tensive medication doses. However, it is rare for ESA to be 
withdrawn because of uncontrollable hypertension. Risk 
factors include preexisting hypertension, a rapid increase 
in hemoglobin, the presence of dysfunctional native kid-
neys, and severe anemia prior to treatment. The cause of 
the hypertensive effect is incompletely understood. Factors 
that may contribute include the partial reversal of hypoxic 
vasodilation as the hemoglobin rises, reduced nitric ox -
ide, increased cytosolic calcium levels, increased plasma 
endothelin levels, activation of the renin–angiotensin–  
aldosterone system and others. Various antihypertensives, 
including long-acting calcium channel blockers, are effec-
tive for treating hypertension associated with ESA.
2. Seizures. These may occur in a small number of patients 
during periods of rapidly increasing hemoglobin in associa-
tion with hypertension. The risk of seizures is small using 
current ESA dosing protocols.
3. Graft clotting. The increase in blood viscosity with higher hemo-
globin values from either ESA therapy or other causes could 
theoretically cause increased dialyzer and arteriovenous 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   598 11/10/14   3:51 am
599Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
graft clotting. Studies to date have not consistently demon-
strated an increased risk of thrombosis when the hemoglobin 
is raised to the 11–12 g/dL (110–120 g/L) range. The impact 
of higher hemoglobin levels is controversial. It should be 
clear that some patients may experience substantial hemo-
concentration during or after the hemodialysis treatment, 
and effects on blood viscosity and risk for access thrombosis 
may be a particular concern in this setting.
4. Stroke. The risk of stroke has been increased in some of 
the randomized trials of ESAs where a relatively high Hgb 
level has been targeted, but this was not noted in all such 
studies.
5. Effect on Kt/V. During dialysis, urea is removed from both 
red cells and plasma, and so urea clearance and Kt/V-urea 
are not affected by an increase in the Hgb. Creatinine and 
phosphorus are removed from the plasma only during pas-
sage of blood through the dialyzer, and as the Hgb is in-
creased, at any given blood flow rate, the plasma flow rate 
and creatinine and phosphorus clearances will be propor -
tionately reduced.
E. ESA T reatment and Cancer.  In studies of ESA treatment for anemia 
related to chemotherapy or cancer, there has been some evi -
dence to suggest that ESA treatment could reduce overall and 
progression-free survival. This has led to significant changes 
in the approach to ESA treatment in patients with cancer. 
Because some patients with ESKD may have either an active 
or past malignancy, the subject is relevant and affects treat -
ment decisions (Hazzan, 2014).
The data, however, are not entirely consistent. For exam-
ple, five published meta-analyses of published trials have not 
found ESA treatment to adversely impact complete responses, 
disease progression, or progression-free survival. However, spe-
cific studies of certain types of cancer do indicate an adverse 
effect, for example, in patients with head and neck cancer 
receiving radiotherapy. It should be noted that in studies dem-
onstrating potential harm, ESA treatment was used to target 
relatively high hemoglobin levels (up to 16 g/dL in men). While 
the meta-analyses provide some reassurance, the adverse 
effects of ESAs in some studies should drive a conservative 
approach to treatment until the question is fully resolved.
We would suggest that for ESKD patients with a history 
of past malignancy, ESA therapy can be cautiously employed 
with hemoglobin targets as noted above for general treatment 
of ESKD patients. In patients with active malignancy, whether 
or not the patient is currently receiving chemotherapy, we 
would recommend a more conservative approach to treat -
ment. This is based on an uncertainty in current knowledge on 
 progression-free survival and increased thromboembolic risk in 
cancer patients. We would suggest lowering the  target hemoglo-
bin to 9–10 g/dL (90–100 g/L). For symptomatic, urgent anemia 
correction, blood transfusion should be employed.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   599 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
600
F. Causes of decreased response to ESA therapy
1. Iron deficiency. The most important cause of a suboptimal 
response to ESA therapy is iron deficiency. Iron deficiency 
can be present at the outset of therapy, but more commonly, 
it develops during therapy, either due to rapid utilization of 
iron to support erythropoiesis or as the result of blood loss 
(Table 34.1).
a. Blood loss. Hemodialysis patients develop iron deficiency 
primarily because of chronic blood loss. Between reten-
tion of blood in the dialysis lines and filter, surgical blood 
loss, accidental bleeding from the access, blood sam-
pling for laboratory testing, and occult gastrointestinal 
bleeding, iron losses may be substantial. Because of the 
overall burden of blood loss, it is very difficult to main-
tain iron stores in hemodialysis patients using oral iron 
supplements only. Losses in peritoneal dialysis patients 
are substantially less, and these patients can often be 
maintained on oral iron therapy.
b. Functional iron deficiency . In addition to a depleted iron 
supply, the demand for iron increases during ESA 
treatment, leading to a further strain on depleted iron 
stores. After the intravenous injection of ESA, there is 
an increase in the rate of erythropoiesis that leads to a 
greater immediate need for iron. In this setting, iron defi-
ciency may occur even in the face of normal body iron 
stores. This phenomenon has been termed “functional 
iron deficiency. ”
c. Inflammation (reticuloendothelial blockade).  Occult inflam -
mation is often present in ESKD patients. It causes 
an increase in serum hepcidin concentrations, which 
•	 Depletion 	of	iron	stores
•	 Chronic	blood	loss
1.	 Blood 	retention	by	the	dialysis	lines	and	filter
2.	 Blood 	sampling	for	laboratory	testing
3.	 Accidents 	related	to	the	vascular	access
4.	 Surgical 	blood	loss
5.	 Occult 	gastrointestinal	bleeding
•	 Decreased 	dietary	iron	absorption
1.	 Phosphate 	binders	inhibit	iron	absorption
2.	 Histamine-2 	blockers,	proton-pump	blockers,	and	functional	achlorhydria	
impair	iron	absorption
3.	 Uremic 	gut	does	not	absorb	iron	optimally
•	 Increased 	iron	demand
1.	 Due 	to	increased	rate	of	erythropoiesis	induced	by	erythropoiesis-
stimulating	agents
2.	 Impaired 	release	of	iron	from	storage	tissues	(reticuloendothelial 	
blockade)
Causes	of	Iron	Deficiency	in	Hemodialysis	Patients
34.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   600 11/10/14   3:51 am
601Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
causes reduced intestinal iron absorption and dimin-
ished availability of iron in storage tissues.
d. Poor absorption of dietary iron.  Iron deficiency among 
patients on dialysis may be exacerbated by poor absorp-
tion of dietary or medicinal iron. However, the subject 
is controversial, and results from studies have been 
conflicting.
2. Diagnosis
a. Serum ferritin.  Ferritin is a protein used to store iron 
inside cells in a nontoxic form. Free iron is toxic to cells 
because it can generate free radicals. Although most fer-
ritin is intracellular, some appears in the circulation and 
reflects iron stores, although the function of ferritin is 
to store iron and not to transport it in the circulation. 
Because serum ferritin is cleared by the liver, in hepatic 
insufficiency, serum levels may be markedly increased. 
A more common cause of increased serum ferritin is 
any sort of inflammation, as ferritin is an acute phase 
reactant. Serum ferritin levels can also be high in certain 
cancers and with malnutrition. If the serum ferritin level 
is <200 mcg/L, the likelihood of iron deficiency is quite 
high. However, absolute iron deficiency can be present 
with much higher serum ferritin levels in the presence of 
inflammation.
b. T ransferrin saturation.  Transferrin is a glycoprotein that 
normally transports iron in the blood. In diagnosing ane-
mia, transferrin levels are not measured directly. Instead, 
one can measure total iron binding capacity (TIBC) after 
a loading a serum sample with iron. This test measures 
how much iron the blood can carry in non-Hgb form, and 
is an indirect reflection of the transferrin level. Normal 
values for TIBC are 240–450 mcg/dL (43–81 mcmol/L). 
The percent transferrin saturation (TSAT) is calculated 
by dividing the serum iron by the TIBC, and the value for 
TSAT normally is about 30% with a range of 20%–50%.
c. Use of serum ferritin and TSA T to diagnose cause of anemia and 
ESA resistance.  The serum ferritin concentration and 
transferrin saturation percentage (TSAT) have been the 
two most widely used tests of iron status for dialysis 
patients. However, neither test is very accurate for the 
assessment of iron deficiency in this patient population; 
the tests provide only a rough estimate of iron status. 
Thus, patients should not be treated intensively with 
intravenous iron based only on the results of these indi-
ces. The NKF’s KDOQI anemia guidelines state that iron 
tests should be interpreted in the context of patients’ 
clinical status, Hgb level, and ESA responsiveness. The 
2012 KDIGO anemia in CKD guidelines suggest evaluat -
ing iron status (TSAT and serum ferritin) at least every 3 
months during ESA therapy; however, these guidelines 
recommend monitoring these levels more frequently 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   601 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
602
when initiating or increasing ESA dose, when there is 
blood loss, when monitoring response after a course of 
IV iron, and in other circumstances where iron stores 
may become depleted.
In our opinion, intensification of iron therapy for 
hemodialysis patients should be considered at a serum 
ferritin of <200 ng/mL or TSAT of <20%. We would rec-
ommend maintaining TSAT >20% and serum ferritin > 
100 ng/mL in peritoneal dialysis patients. Iron testing 
should usually be delayed for 1 week after treatment with 
intravenous iron. Functional iron deficiency can mani-
fest as a low TSAT with normal or elevated ferritin levels. 
With inflammation and reticuloendothelial blockade, 
ferritin levels are typically increased, but TSAT may be 
normal, as serum iron may be low, but inflammation also 
lowers serum transferrin, and so the TSAT is often not 
reduced.
d. Reticulocyte hemoglobin content (CHr) . This test is another 
test used to assess iron status and is a more direct mea-
sure of iron availability at the level of red blood cell pro-
duction (Brugnara, 2003). Several studies document a 
good level of diagnostic accuracy and cost effectiveness, 
and the test shows less variability than other tests of iron 
status (Fishbane, 2001). When the CHr value is <29–32 
pg/cell, patients are usually iron deficient and benefit 
from intravenous iron treatment.
3. Iron treatment
a. General principles. Iron therapy is an integral component 
of anemia treatment in ESKD. Intravenous iron may be 
administered on an episodic basis as needed when iron 
deficiency develops, or by the repeated administration of 
small doses to maintain iron balance.
b. Oral iron.  Oral iron preparations are safe and relatively 
inexpensive. However, these supplements are associated 
with poor efficacy and troublesome side effects, such 
as constipation, dyspepsia, bloating, or diarrhea. Three 
randomized trials have compared oral iron with either 
placebo or no iron treatment in hemodialysis patients; 
none of the three was able to demonstrate any efficacy 
for oral iron. Therefore, oral iron should not be used for 
most hemodialysis patients.
For patients on peritoneal dialysis, oral iron is much 
more convenient than intravenous iron. Since these pa -
tients experience less chronic blood loss, oral iron may 
be sufficient to maintain iron stores. Intravenous iron 
therapy should be used in peritoneal dialysis patients 
when resistance to ESA is present and the serum ferritin 
is <100 ng/mL and the TSAT is <20%.
1) Dosage and administration.  Oral iron usually is given as 
ferrous sulfate, fumarate, or gluconate, in a dosage of 
200 mg of elemental iron per day. The timing of the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   602 11/10/14   3:51 am
603Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
iron dose is important; ideally, iron should be taken on 
an empty stomach to optimize efficacy. The primary 
sites of iron absorption are the duodenum and proxi-
mal jejunum, and gastrointestinal symptoms are pro-
portional to the amount of elemental iron presented to 
the duodenum at a single time; reduction of symptom-
atology may require changing the oral preparation, 
using pediatric dosages at more frequent intervals, 
or even taking the iron dosage with food. Others have 
suggested giving the medication during dialysis ses-
sions (e.g., at the beginning and the end of the ses-
sion) to help ensure patient compliance. Yet another 
strategy is to give oral iron only at bedtime. A common 
problem with oral iron is constipation, which can be 
partially managed, if necessary, with stool softeners 
or laxatives. Some iron preparations contain small 
doses of ascorbic acid to enhance iron absorption, 
but the advantage of the added vitamin is not estab-
lished. Phosphorus binders, antacids,  histamine-2 
 antagonists, and proton-pump inhibitors may all 
inhibit the absorption of oral iron supplements. On 
the other hand, some novel phosphorus binders such 
as ferric citrate contain iron, and their use serves not 
only to reduce serum phosphorus in dialysis patients, 
but also to supply measurable amounts of iron via the 
gastrointestinal tract with lower requirements for IV 
iron and ESA (Umanath, 2013).
c. Intravenous iron.  Four preparations are available in the 
United States: Iron dextran, ferric gluconate, ferumoxytol, 
and iron sucrose. Intravenous iron therapy has superior 
availability and efficacy when compared with oral iron 
therapy. In hemodialysis patients, the target hemoglo-
bin level is difficult to achieve without intravenous iron 
treatment. As a result, most hemodialysis patients will 
require intravenous iron on a regular basis. In contrast, 
intravenous therapy costs more, and its safety profile is 
less clear than that of oral iron. There are two commonly 
used intravenous iron dosing strategies. One is to treat 
established iron deficiency with a repletive 1,000-mg dose 
administered over 8–10 consecutive hemodialysis treat -
ments. Alternatively, since iron deficiency occurs so fre-
quently in hemodialysis patients, a weekly maintenance 
dose of 25–100 mg may be used. A recent observational 
study found the repletion method to have greater efficacy 
compared with maintenance dosing (Kshirsagar, 2013a), 
while not obviously increasing the risk for cardiovascular 
events (Kshirsagar, 2013b). However, a repletion strategy 
may have a greater infection risk compared with bolus 
therapy (Brookhart, 2013). When intravenous iron is 
required for peritoneal dialysis patients, infusions of 250 
mg of iron may be administered over 1–2 hours.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   603 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
604
1) Intravenous iron safety: General considerations.  The most 
important issue to understand about the safety of 
intravenous iron is that it has not been well studied. 
There have been no studies of sufficient size and dura-
tion. Because of iron’s oxidizing properties, direct 
injection of iron into the circulation has important 
potential safety implications. Without adequate study 
data, it is difficult to balance the benefits or risks of 
intravenous iron.
2) Intravenous iron safety: Anaphylaxis.  The best understood 
complication of intravenous iron treatment is the rare 
occurrence of anaphylactoid-type reactions. These are 
characterized by the abrupt occurrence of hypoten -
sion, dyspnea, flushing, and back pain. With iron dex -
tran, the rate has been estimated as 0.7% of patients 
treated. Such reactions are less frequently observed, 
and tend to be of milder intensity with the nondextran 
forms of iron.
3) Intravenous iron safety: Infection.  Iron is a vital growth 
factor for microorganisms, and intravenous iron 
treatment has the potential to make iron more read -
ily available to these pathogens. In addition, in vitro 
studies suggest that iron treatment may interfere with 
phagocytic function of white blood cells. Early retro-
spective studies found higher serum ferritin levels in 
hemodialysis patients to be associated with increased 
risk of infection. In contrast, a large, prospective, mul-
ticenter study (Hoen, 2002) found no relation between 
serum ferritin or treatment with intravenous iron 
and risk of bacteremia. The current literature on this 
subject remains inconclusive (Brookhart, 2013), but a 
prudent approach would be to avoid intravenous iron 
treatment during acute infectious episodes.
4) Intravenous iron safety: Oxidation.  Iron is a highly oxida-
tive substance, and treatment with intravenous iron 
has the potential to overburden the body’s native anti-
oxidant systems. Oxidative damage to tissue and mol-
ecules has been clearly demonstrated experimentally, 
although the clinical significance of such findings is 
not clear (Fishbane, 2014). A potential harmful effect 
of vascular oxidation would be an acceleration of ath-
erosclerotic processes.
d. Intravenous iron drugs.
1) Intravenous iron dextran. Because of the higher expected 
risk of anaphylaxis, iron dextran use should gener -
ally be reserved for patients who have a long history 
of prior safe use of the drug. This is probably true for 
all current forms of iron dextran, but particularly the 
high molecular weight variety (Chertow, 2006). In 
nonuremic patients, immediate allergic reactions to 
intravenous iron dextran have been reported. These 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   604 11/10/14   3:51 am
605Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
usually occur within 5 minutes of injection but may 
be delayed by 45 minutes or more. For this reason, 
 epinephrine and other means to treat anaphylaxis 
must be at hand when intravenous iron dextran is 
administered. Importantly, Walters and Van Wyck 
(2005) reported that almost all severe reactions occur 
with the test dose or first therapeutic dose. Milder 
immediate hypersensitivity reactions to iron dextran 
infusion include itching and urticaria. Delayed reac -
tions can manifest as lymphadenopathy, myalgia, 
arthralgia, fever, and headache.
2) Sodium ferric gluconate.  Intravenous sodium ferric glu-
conate is a nondextran form of iron used in the United 
States since 1999 and in Europe for several decades. 
As discussed above, adverse reactions are probably 
less frequent and less severe than those seen with 
iron dextran. With single-dose exposure the rate of 
severe reactions was 0.04%, and no severe reactions 
were observed with repeated administration of 13,151 
doses to 1,321 patients (Michael, 2002; Michael, 2004). 
Intravenous sodium ferric gluconate may be admin-
istered to hemodialysis patients in the amount of 
1,000 mg given in divided doses over eight consecutive 
treatments (i.e., 125 mg/dose).
3) Iron sucrose. Intravenous iron sucrose was approved for 
use in the United States in 2000 and has been in use 
in Europe for many years. Like sodium ferric gluco -
nate, the other widely used nondextran form of iron, 
reports generally indicate a good safety and efficacy 
profile. No serious adverse reactions occurred in 665 
hemodialysis patients receiving 8,583 doses of the 
drug (Aronoff, 2004). The drug may be administered 
as iron replacement therapy, 100 mg for 10 consecu-
tive doses, or as a weekly dose of 25–100 mg.
4) Iron added to the dialysate.  Ferric pyrophosphate citrate 
(Triferic) is an iron compound designed to be added 
to the dialysis solution with the goal of adding a small 
amount of iron to the patient during each dialysis 
treatment. Preliminary phase 3 results of this com-
pound have been encouraging (Lin, 2013), especially 
in reducing ESA dosage. A new drug application for 
Triferic was filed in the United States in 2014 for use 
of this compound, but it is not yet available for clini-
cal use.
e) Other causes of ESA resistance.
1) Bleeding. An important cause of an apparent hypo -
responsiveness to ESA is bleeding. Sometimes, the 
bleeding may be occult, as in gastrointestinal blood 
loss. Often, the bleeding may be obvious, as in patients 
undergoing surgery, menstruating women, or those 
with accidents involving the vascular access. It is 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   605 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
606
vitally important to limit blood loss by any means pos-
sible. In addition, fecal occult blood testing should 
be performed when unexplained ESA resistance is 
present.
2) Red blood cell life span.  It is well known that RBC lifes-
pan is 20%–30% shorter on average in hemodialysis 
or peritoneal dialysis patients than normal subjects. 
Recently, a correlation was found between the degree 
of shortening of RBC lifespan and ESA resistance, but 
no treatment has been devised to prolong RBC lifes-
pan in those patients in whom lifespan is shortest 
(Dou, 2012).
3) Inflammation and infection.  As with infection, inflam -
matory states lead to resistance to ESA therapy. In 
patients on dialysis, the underlying cause of inflam-
mation may not be readily apparent. Cytokine 
release results in downregulation of expression of 
erythropoietin receptors on erythrocyte precursors. 
In addition, chronic inflammation and infection 
increases hepcidin production, which disrupts iron 
availability by diminishing intestinal iron absorption 
and release from reticuloendothelial cells (D’ Angelo, 
2013). There is no perfect marker for occult inflam -
mation, but C-reactive protein (CRP) is a helpful test 
for predicting ESA hyporesponsiveness caused by 
inflammation (Kalantar-Zadeh, 2003). A retained, 
nonfunctioning renal allograft can increase CRP 
levels and be a source of EPO resistance (Lopez-
Gomez, 2004). ESA resistance is increased in 
patients with evidence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
infection (Betjest, 2009), but, paradoxically, may be 
reduced in patients infected with hepatitis C (Seong, 
2013). Also, in African American patients with sickle 
cell trait or hemoglobin C, a moderately higher aver -
age ESA dose is required (about 12%, Derebail, 2014).
A search for occult infection should be under -
taken in patients with unexplained ESA resistance. If 
infection is present, higher doses of ESA may be effec-
tive by partially overcoming the temporary resistance. 
One occult site of infection is in old, nonfunctioning, 
arteriovenous grafts, where treatment of the infection 
may reverse ESA resistance (Nassar, 2002).
4) Hyperparathyroidism. Hyperparathyroidism may be 
a cause of ESA resistance. There is a clear relation-
ship between elevated iPTH levels and diminished 
ESA response. In addition, after parathyroidectomy, 
responsiveness improves (Al-Hilali, 2007). It does 
not appear that parathyroid hormone itself inhibits 
erythropoiesis. The pathogenesis is incompletely 
understood, but appears to represent a complex 
interplay of a variety of pathogenic factors. In the 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   606 11/10/14   3:51 am
607Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
ESA-resistant patient who is found to have elevated 
iPTH levels, an intensification of the treatment of 
hyperparathyroidism is indicated.
5) Vitamin D. Data suggest that Hgb levels are lower in dialy-
sis patients with low serum levels of 25- hydroxyvitamin 
D, and vitamin D is a potent suppressor of hepcidin in 
humans, suggesting that treatment with vitamin D 
may improve anemia management. Although some 
preliminary data suggest that vitamin D treatment 
may be of some use, at present, results are preliminary 
and require confirmation by larger randomized trials 
(see Icardi, 2013)
6) Relative vitamin B12 deficiency. Vitamin B12 and folic acid 
levels should be checked when unexplained ESA 
resistance is present; a case can be made for more 
routine evaluation of this parameter. Many dialysis 
patients are taking proton-pump inhibitors, known 
to be associated with subnormal B12 levels, and inten-
sive, high-flux hemodialysis and hemodiafiltration 
treatments have been shown to lower vitamin B12 lev-
els. In one study from Australia (Killen, 2014), 91/142 
hemodialysis patients had serum vitamin B 12 levels 
of less than 300 pmol/L, a level suggesting deficiency. 
Only five patients had levels of less than 150 pmol/L, 
which represents clear-cut deficiency. A short course 
of three treatments of hydroxycobalamin 1,000 mcg 
per week was given. Treatment was repeated if B12 lev-
els remained below 300 pmol/L. Hydroxycobalamin 
treatment resulted in a more than 50% reduction in 
median EPO requirement, from 11 to 5 thousand units 
per week. IV iron requirements were also reduced by 
half. The authors also suggest that cyanocobalamin 
(a form of B 12 commonly used in oral supplements) 
should not be given to ESKD patients because of cya-
nide accumulation, but that hydroxycobalamin be 
used. In this study, B 12 was given intramuscularly. It 
is not clear whether subcutaneous administration 
would lead to similar results.
7) Inadequate dialysis.  In the urea reduction ratio (URR) 
range of 60 to 75%, there appears to be a weak associ-
ation with increased hematocrit and higher levels of 
URR (Ifudu, 2000). Beyond that, careful, randomized 
studies of more frequent dialysis (i.e., the FHN Trials), 
either in-center or nocturnal, have shown no benefit 
in terms of increasing ESA responsiveness.
8) Aluminum intoxication.  Although problems with alu -
minum have become less common among dialysis 
patients, occasional problems may still occur, espe-
cially in patients who have been on dialysis for many 
years. The effect on erythropoiesis is a microcytic 
anemia associated with impaired iron utilization. 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   607 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
608
Interestingly, intestinal aluminum absorption is sig -
nificantly increased in patients with iron deficiency. 
A serum aluminum level provides a rough guide to 
aluminum status; if the results are suggestive, either a 
deferoxamine stimulation test or a bone biopsy may be 
warranted.
9) Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. ACE inhib-
itors may reduce EPO production in patients with 
chronic renal failure or following renal transplant. 
Among patients on dialysis, a reduction in ESA 
responsiveness has not been uniformly demonstrated 
in association with these agents.
10) Pure red cell aplasia. An outbreak of immune-mediated 
pure red cell aplasia has been reported, primarily in 
Europe, in association with ESA treatment. In the 
first 10 years of worldwide ESA availability, only three 
cases were noted among more than a million treated 
patients. Subsequently, the rate increased dramati -
cally, with at least 184 cases reported between 1998 
and 2003. In ESA-associated pure red cell apla-
sia, Hgb declines rapidly as does the reticulocyte 
count. Patients become transfusion-dependent, 
and the bone marrow demonstrates absence of ery-
throid precursors. The cause is the development of 
antierythropoietin antibodies that neutralize both 
therapeutic and endogenous erythropoietin. The 
majority of cases occurred in Europe, with epoetin 
alfa sold under the brand name of Eprex. After a peak 
in cases in 2002, the number declined substantially, 
but sporadic cases continued to develop. The cause of 
the syndrome (why do antierythrpoietin antibodies 
develop) was never fully elucidated. Certain biosimi -
lar forms of ESAs have been associated with a greater 
risk for antierythropoietin antibodies, so vigilance is 
required as use of biosimilar ESAs increases.
11) Other hematologic disease.  Patients on dialysis are at 
risk for developing the same hematologic diseases 
as nonuremic subjects. Because of the emphasis on 
EPO deficiency, other hematologic diseases may 
go unrecognized. Among the potential causes not 
already discussed above are hematologic malignancy, 
myelodysplastic syndromes, and hemolysis. When an 
exhaustive evaluation for causes of ESA resistance 
is unrevealing, hematology consultation and a bone 
marrow biopsy may be considered as a last step in the 
process to rule out unexpected hematologic disease.
G. Red blood cell transfusions. Transfusion of packed red cells should 
be used in severely anemic patients who are experiencing 
symptoms. Transfusion should never be utilized without a 
concurrent evaluation for causes of bleeding.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   608 11/10/14   3:51 am
609Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
H. Carnitine. It has been suggested that carnitine may enhance 
responsiveness to ESA. A recent multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial found that administra -
tion of carnitine failed to improve response to ESA therapy 
(Mercadal, 2012). The 2012 KDIGO anemia in CKD guidelines 
do not recommend the use of carnitine as an adjuvant to ESA 
treatment.
I. Ascorbic acid. Although the literature is mixed, several studies 
have found that intravenous ascorbic acid may improve epo-
etin responsiveness for patients on hemodialysis. A typical 
regimen is intravenous vitamin C given three times weekly 
with the hemodialysis treatment. Deved (2009) conducted 
a meta-analysis. While concerned about small sample sizes 
and deficits in study quality, the authors found ascorbic acid 
to generally result in increased Hgb and decreased ESA dose. 
Since vitamin C may lead to increases in oxalate production, 
appropriate caution must be used in patient selection and 
duration of therapy.
 II. HEMOlySIS
A. General comments.  Destruction of RBCs, either intravascularly 
or extravascularly, may occasionally contribute to anemia in 
dialysis patients. Generally speaking, red cell survival appears 
to be shortened with chronic renal failure (approximately 30% 
compared with healthy subjects [Ly, 2004]). It is likely that this 
is due not to an inherent abnormality of the red cell, but to an 
effect of the uremic environment.
B. Diagnosis. Chronic hemolysis should be suspected when the 
patient develops high-grade ESA resistance in the presence of 
increased serum lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), unconjugated 
bilirubin, or a decrease in serum haptoglobin. The differen-
tial diagnosis of chronic hemolysis is broad, and includes all 
causes of hemolysis seen in nonuremic patients (Table 34.2) 
and several causes specific to patients treated with hemodi-
alysis. Occasionally, hemolysis can be severe, associated with 
hypotension, or sometimes hypertension, and with abdomi -
nal, chest, and/or back pain, shortness of breath, nausea, 
 vomiting, or diarrhea, and encephalopathy developing during 
the dialysis procedure (Duffy, 2000).
C. Etiology .  The most common correctible cause of hemolysis is 
due to some problem with the hemodialysis system. Faulty or 
kinked blood line tubing can do this via mechanical damage to 
RBCs. Chloramine in the dialysis solution; use of a hypotonic 
or overheated dialysis solution; copper, zinc, or nitrate in the 
water supply; or formaldehyde not rinsed out of the dialyzer 
after reprocessing, are among the causes. Machine/dialysis 
solution–based issues are discussed in Chapters 4 and 5.
D. T reatment.  If acute, severe hemolysis is suspected, the dialysis 
treatment should be terminated immediately. Circulatory sup-
port should be provided as needed, and an electrocardiogram 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   609 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
610
must be obtained to determine whether hyperkalemic changes 
are present (which may be delayed) and to assess for acute car-
diac ischemia. A blood sample should be obtained for deter -
mination of hemoglobin, hematocrit, and serum chemistries, 
especially serum potassium.
 III. DISORDERS OF HEMOSTASIS.
A. Introduction. The formation of a blood clot in response to vascu-
lar injury is a complex and highly conserved process in mam-
malian species. Disorders of platelet quantity or function can 
lead to bleeding in superficial sites, such as the skin and mucous 
membranes. Disorders of the coagulation system usually lead to 
bleeding into deeper structures, such as muscle and joints. Prior 
to the introduction of dialysis, bleeding tendencies were long 
recognized among uremic subjects. Dialysis partially reverses 
the abnormal hemostasis, but ecchymoses, excessive access 
bleeding, and occasional severe bleeding episodes still occur.
B. Pathophysiology. Many factors contribute to the deranged state 
of uremic hemostasis, with disorders in platelet function 
(thrombasthenia) being most important. Platelet counts may 
be slightly reduced, but commonly are normal in well-dialyzed 
patients, and severe thrombocytopenia is uncommon. Platelet 
aggregation is abnormal, probably because of reduced plate-
let granule adenosine phosphate and serotonin levels, and 
defective thromboxane A 2 production. Platelet function may 
also be hindered in uremic patients by increased endothelial 
Related	to	the	hemodialysis	procedure
Dialysis	solution
Contaminants
Chloramine
Copper,	zinc
Nitrates, nitrites
Overheated
Hypo-osmolar
Reuse	of	sterilants	(formaldehyde)
Kinked	or	defective	tubing—trauma	to	RBCs
Needle	trauma	to	RBCs
Subclavian	catheter	(helmet	cells,	schistocytes)
Malfunctioning	cardiac	valve	prosthesis
Insufficient	dialysis
Hypersplenism
Associated	diseases
Sickle cell anemia
Other	hemoglobinopathies
Connective	tissue	diseases	with	vasculitis
Drug-induced
Hypophosphatemia
Causes	of	Hemolysis	in	Dialysis	Patients
34.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   610 11/10/14   3:51 am
611Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
nitric oxide production (Remuzzi, 1990). An adhesion recep-
tor, the glycoprotein (GP) IIb–IIIa complex, plays an impor -
tant role in controlling the formation of platelet thrombi. In 
uremic patients, the activation of the GP IIb–IIIa receptor is 
impaired, but activation is partially restored by dialysis. There 
has been a suggestion that abnormalities of von Willebrand 
factor (important for maintaining platelet adhesion in rapid 
blood flow) may contribute to disordered uremic hemostasis, 
but study results have been inconsistent. Anemia itself prob-
ably contributes to uremic bleeding; abnormally prolonged 
bleeding time is significantly improved when the hematocrit 
is increased to >30%. The hemodialysis procedure itself may 
impact on platelet number and function. Polysulfone dialyz -
ers sterilized by electron beam have been reported to cause 
a reduction in platelet count, but this effect may vary with 
how the membrane is produced, and is not a consistent find-
ing. Antiplatelet drugs may further impair platelet function in 
ESKD. Hemodialysis patients have a greater risk of bleeding 
complications while on these drugs than the general popula-
tion (Hiremath, 2009).
C. Assessment. Disordered hemostasis should be evaluated in 
terms of clinical manifestations and by testing of skin bleeding 
time. Patients with ecchymoses, excessive access bleeding, or 
any clinically significant bleeding episodes (including hemor -
rhagic pericarditis) should have platelet count, prothrombin 
time, partial thromboplastin time, and bleeding time tested. 
The bleeding time becomes abnormal when the platelet count 
is markedly decreased, when platelet function is impaired, 
or if the vascular wall is damaged. The risk of hemorrhage 
increases when the bleeding time is elevated to more than 
10 minutes.
D. T reatment.  The management of dialysis patients experiencing 
bleeding requires (a) an estimate of the severity of blood loss, 
(b) hemodynamic stabilization, (c) transfusion with blood prod-
ucts as needed, (d) identification of the bleeding source, and 
(e) treatment of platelet dysfunction and other factors contrib-
uting to the bleeding diathesis. Intensive dialysis of previously 
underdialyzed patients often results in some improvement 
in bleeding tendency. The administration of cryoprecipitate 
(a plasma extract with high concentrations of von Willebrand 
factor) does not consistently result in improved platelet func-
tion. In one study, only two of five treated patients had normal-
ized bleeding time and a favorable outcome (Triulzi, 1990). 
Desmopressin (a synthetic analog of antidiuretic hormone) 
leads to increased release of von Willebrand factor multim-
ers. A dose of 0.3 mcg/kg body weight may be administered 
diluted in 50 mL of saline intravenously over 30 minutes. In a 
well-designed study, this regimen led to a reduction in bleeding 
time in 1 hour, which lasted for 8 hours. The drug has little vaso-
constrictive effect and should not cause hyponatremia in ESKD 
patients. Finally, repetitive intravenous infusions of conjugated 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   611 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
612
estrogens may reduce bleeding time significantly. More practi-
cally, one oral dose of 25 mg conjugated estrogen (Premarin) 
normalizes bleeding time for up to 10 days. This effect is in 
contrast to the relatively short period of action of cryoprecipi-
tate or desmopressin. We recommend the use of desmopres-
sin empirically for dialysis patients with severe acute bleeding. 
In contrast, conjugated estrogens may be helpful in correcting 
an abnormal bleeding time prior to planned surgery or to treat 
chronic gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with telangiecta-
sia. Estrogens alone, PO, IV , or transdermally (Sloand & Schiff, 
1995), or estrogen–  progesterone combinations have all been 
used (Boccardo, 2004).
References and Selected Readings
Alarcon MC, et al. Hormone therapy with estrogen patches for the treatment of recur-
rent digestive hemorrhages in uremic patients. Nefrologia. 2002;22:208–209.
Al-Hilali N, et al. Does parathyroid hormone affect erythropoietin therapy in dialysis 
patients? Med Princ Pract. 2007;16:63–67.
Aronoff G, et al. Iron sucrose in hemodialysis patients: safety of replacement and main-
tenance regimens. Kidney Int. 2004;66:1193–1198.
Besarab A, et al. The effects of normal as compared with low hematocrit values in 
patients with cardiac disease who are receiving hemodialysis and epoetin. N Engl 
J Med. 1998;339:584–590.
Betjest MGH, Weimar W , Litjens NHR. CMV seropositivity determines epoetin dose 
and hemoglobin levels in patients with CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;20:2661–2666.
Boven K, et al. Epoetin-associated pure red cell aplasia in patients with chronic kidney 
disease: solving the mystery. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2005;20(suppl 3):iii33–iii40.
Brookhart MA, et al. Infection risk with bolus versus maintenance iron supplementa-
tion in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:1151–1158.
Brugnara C. Iron deficiency and erythropoiesis: new diagnostic approaches. Clin Chem. 
2003;49:1573–1578.
Chertow GM, et al. Update on adverse effects associated with parenteral iron. Nephrol 
Dial Transplant. 2006;21:378–382.
Coritsidis GN, et al. Anemia management trends in hospital-based dialysis centers 
(HBDCs), 2010 to 2013. Clin Therap. 2014;36:408–418.
D’ Angelo G. Role of hepcidin in the pathophysiology and diagnosis of anemia. Blood 
Res. 2013;48:10–15.
Daugirdas JT, Bernardo AA. Hemodialysis effect on platelet count and function and 
hemodialysis-associated thrombocytopenia. Kidney Int. 2012;82:147–157.
Derebail VK, et al. Sickle trait in African-American hemodialysis patients and higher 
erythropoiesis-stimulating agent dose. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;25:819–826.
Deved V , et al; Alberta Kidney Disease Network. Ascorbic acid for anemia management 
in hemodialysis patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2009;54:1089–1097.
Drüeke TB, et al, and the CREATE Investigators. Normalization of hemoglobin level 
in patients with chronic kidney disease and anemia. N Engl J Med. 2006;355: 
2071–2084.
Dou Y, et al. Red blood cell life span and ‘erythropoietin resistance’. Kidney Int. 
2012;81:1275–1276.
Duffy R, et al. Multistate outbreak of hemolysis in hemodialysis patients traced to 
faulty blood tubing sets. Kidney Int. 2000;57:1668–1674.
Escolar G, Diaz-Ricart M, Cases A. Uremic platelet dysfunction: past and present 
[Review]. Curr Hematol Rep. 2005;4:359–367.
Fishbane S, et al. A randomized trial of iron deficiency testing strategies in hemodialy-
sis patients. Kidney Int. 2001;60:2406–2411.
Fishbane S, Mathew A, Vaziri ND. Iron toxicity: relevance for dialysis patients. Nephrol 
Dial Transplant. 2014;29:255–259.
Foley RN, et al. Effect of hemoglobin levels in hemodialysis patients with asymptom-
atic cardiomyopathy. Kidney Int. 2000;58:1325–1335.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   612 11/10/14   3:51 am
613Chapter 34 / Hematologic Abnormalities
Furuland H, et al. A randomized controlled trial of haemoglobin normalization 
with epoetin alfa in pre-dialysis and dialysis patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2003;18:353–361.
Gaweda AE, et al. Determining optimum hemoglobin sampling for anemia manage -
ment from every-treatment data. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5:1939–1945.
Gaweda AE, et al. Individualized anemia management reduces hemoglobin variability 
in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;25:159–166.
Gunnell J, et al. Acute-phase response predicts erythropoietin resistance in hemodialy-
sis and peritoneal dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;33:63–72.
Hazzan AD, et al. ESA treatment and cancer. Kidney Int. 2014;86:34-39.
Hiremath S, et al. Antiplatelet medications in hemodialysis patients: a systematic 
review of bleeding rates. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;4:1347–1355.
Hoen B, et al. Intravenous iron administration does not significantly increase the risk 
of bacteremia in chronic hemodialysis patients. Clin Nephrol. 2002;57:457–461.
Icardi A, et al. Renal anaemia and EPO hyporesponsiveness associated with vita-
min D deficiency: the potential role of inflammation. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2013;28:1672–1679.
Ifudu O, et al. Adequacy of dialysis and differences in hematocrit among dialysis facili-
ties. Am J Kidney Dis. 2000;36:1166-74.
Kalantar-Zadeh K, et al. Effect of malnutrition-inflammation complex syndrome on 
EPO hyporesponsiveness in maintenance hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2003;42:761–773.
Kaufman JS, et al. Subcutaneous compared with intravenous epoetin in patients 
receiving hemodialysis. Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group 
on Erythropoietin in Hemodialysis Patients. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:578–583.
Kaw D, Malhotra D. Platelet dysfunction and end-stage renal disease. Semin Dial. 
2006;19:317–22.
Killen JP , Brenninger VL. Hydroxycobalamin supplementation and erythropoiesis 
stimulating agent hyporesponsiveness in haemodialysis patients. Nephrology. 
2014;19:164–171.
Kshirsagar AV , et al. The comparative short-term effectiveness of iron dosing and for-
mulations in us hemodialysis patients. Am J Med. 2013a;126:541.
Kshirsagar AV , et al. Intravenous iron supplementation practices and short-term risk of 
cardiovascular events in hemodialysis patients. PLoS One. 2013b;8:e78930.
Levin A, et al. Canadian randomized trial of hemoglobin maintenance to prevent 
or delay left ventricular mass growth in patients with CKD. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2005;46:799–811.
Lines SW , et al. A predictive algorithm for the management of anaemia in haemodialy-
sis patients based on ESA pharmacodynamics: better results for less work. Nephrol 
Dial Transplant. 2012;27:2425–2429.
Lin VH, et al. Soluble ferric pyrophosphate (SFP) administered via dialysate reduces 
ESA requirements in CKD-HD patients with ESA hypo-response, SA-OR082 
[abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:90A.
Lopez-Gomez JM, et al. Presence of a failed kidney transplant in patients who are on 
hemodialysis is associated with chronic inflammatory state and erythropoietin 
resistance. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004;15:2494–2501.
Ly J, et al. Red blood cell survival in chronic renal failure. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004;44:  
715–719.
Macdougall IC, et al. Pharmacokinetics of novel erythropoiesis stimulating pro-
tein (NESP) compared with epoietin alfa in dialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol . 
1999;10:2392–2395.
Mercadal L, et al. L-carnitine treatment in incident hemodialysis patients: the mul-
ticenter, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled CARNIDIAL trial.  
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7:1836–1842.
Michael B, et al. Sodium ferric gluconate complex in hemodialysis patients: adverse 
reactions compared to placebo and iron dextran. Kidney Int. 2002;61:1830–1839.
Michael B, et al. Sodium ferric gluconate complex in haemodialysis patients: a prospec-
tive evaluation of long-term safety. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004;19:1576–1580.
Nassar GM, et al. Occult infection of old nonfunctioning arteriovenous grafts: a novel 
cause of erythropoietin resistance and chronic inflammation in hemodialysis 
patients. Kidney Int Suppl. 2002;(80):49–54.
Noris M, Remuzzi G. Uremic bleeding: closing the circle after 30 years of controversies? 
Blood. 1999;94:2569–2574.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   613 11/10/14   3:51 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
614
Ofsthun N, et al. The effects of higher hemoglobin levels on mortality and hospitaliza-
tion in hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int. 2003;63:1908–1914.
Parfrey PS, et al. Double-blind comparison of full and partial anemia correction in inci-
dent hemodialysis patients without symptomatic heart disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2005;16:2180–2189.
Pfeffer MA, et al, and the TREAT Investigators. A trial of darbepoetin alfa in type 2 
diabetes and chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:2019-2032. 
Pillon L, Manzone T. Accuracy of anemia evaluation is improved in a wide variety 
of acute and chronically ill patients by accounting for volume status. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2008;19:164A.
Pollak VE, Lorch JA. Macrocytosis in chronic hemodialysis (HD) patients [abstract].  
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:477A.
Remuzzi G, et al. Role of endothelium derived nitric oxide in the bleeding tendency of 
uremia. J Clin Invest. 1990;86:1768–1771.
Rodrigue MF, et al. Relationship between eicosanoids and endothelin-1 in the 
 pathogenesis of erythropoietin-induced hypertension in uremic rats. J Cardiovasc 
Pharmacol. 2003;41:388–395.
Roob JM, et al. Vitamin E attenuates oxidative stress induced by intravenous iron in 
patients on hemodialysis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2000;11:539–549.
Singh AK, et al and the CHOIR Investigators. Correction of anemia with epoetin alfa in 
chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2085-2098.
Sloand JA, Schiff MJ. Beneficial effect of low-dose transdermal estrogen on bleeding 
time and clinical bleeding in uremia. Am J Kidney Dis. 1995;26:22–26.
Spinowitz BS, et al. The safety and efficacy of ferumoxytol therapy in anemic chronic 
kidney disease patients. Kidney Int. 2005;68:1801–1806.
Triulzi DJ, Blumberg N. Variability in response to cryoprecipitate treatment for 
 hemostatic defects in uremia. Yale J Biol Med. 1990;63:1–7.
Umanath K, et al. Ferric citrate as a phosphate binder reduces IV iron and eryth-
ropoietin stimulating agent (ESA) use, SA-PO-521 [abstract]. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2013;24:221A.
Van Wyck DB, et al. Safety and efficacy of iron sucrose in patients sensitive to iron 
dextran: North American Clinical Trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 2000;36:88–97.
Walters BA, Van Wyck DB. Benchmarking iron dextran sensitivity: reactions requiring 
resuscitative medication in incident and prevalent patients. Nephrol Dial Trans-
plant. 2005;20:1438–1442.
Xia H, et al. Hematocrit levels and hospitalization risks in hemodialysis patients.  
J Am Soc Nephrol. 1999;10:1309–1316.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch034.indd   614 11/10/14   3:51 am