665
36
Bone Disease
Daniel W. Coyne, Derek S. Larson,  
and James A. Delmez
In dialysis patients, the mineral bone axis is deranged. In attempts 
to optimize this, a number of drugs are usually given, including 
 phosphorus binders, active vitamin D derivatives, and calcium-
receptor-sensitizers. Dietary restrictions are often required to limit 
the amount of phosphorus absorbed. To understand how to manage 
the mineral bone disorder (MBD) of chronic kidney disease (CKD), a 
basic understanding of its pathophysiology is helpful.
 I. P ATHOPHYSIOLOGY .  Three hormones are involved primarily in 
maintaining mineral bone homeostasis in early CKD: FGF23, 
calcitriol (also known as 1,25D or 1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol), 
and parathyroid hormone (PTH). These hormones interact with 
the minerals calcium, phosphorus, and, to a lesser extent, magne-
sium to ensure adequate mineral absorption from the gut, appro-
priate mineral excretion by the kidney, and optimal conditions in 
the bone to permit ongoing mineralization and remodeling.
As kidney function declines, there is a progressive loss of 
the ability to maintain mineral homeostasis and normal bone 
turnover. The first problem that arises is the need to maintain 
excretion of phosphorus being ingested from food. The reduced 
number of functioning nephrons results in an increased phos -
phorus load being filtered by each nephron. In an attempt to help 
increase excretion of this added phosphorus load, the levels of 
the hormone FGF23 ( fibroblast growth factor 23) are increased. 
FGF23, produced by osteocytes, affects the function of renal 
tubular cells by acting on a Klotho-FGF receptor complex. FGF23 
stimulates phosphaturia by decreasing the expression and activ -
ity of sodium-phosphate cotransporters in the renal tubules. 
These transporters normally function to reabsorb filtered phos -
phorus, and downregulating them increases the per nephron 
excretion of phosphorus, limiting phosphorus overload.
A second hormone involved in mineral bone homeostasis 
is calcitriol. Calcitriol is synthesized by the body in a 3-stage 
process. The first stage occurs in the skin, which, when exposed 
to ultraviolet light, converts 7-hydroxycholesterol into chole-
calciferol (vitamin D 3). Cholecalciferol is an inactive steroid 
prohormone; it becomes slightly active after the steroid ring is 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   665 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
666
hydroxylated in the 25-position by the liver. This so-called “25-D” 
can then be fully activated by a third step: hydroxylation of the 
steroid ring at the 1-position. This final hydroxylation step can 
occur in a variety of tissues locally, but the most important site 
where 1,25-D is synthesized is in the renal tubules, by an enzyme 
called 1- α hydroxylase. Another name for 1,25-D is calcitriol. 
Calcitriol has many actions pertaining to mineral balance. It 
increases gut calcium and phosphorus absorption, increases cal-
cium reabsorption in the kidney, and suppresses the parathyroid 
gland from making PTH. Calcitriol also helps mineralize bone.
In early CKD, the levels of calcitriol are reduced. This is 
thought to occur by two mechanisms: (1) the increased levels 
of FGF23 induced by the need to increase per nephron  phospho-
rus excretion suppress the 1-α hydroxylase enzyme in the renal 
tubules, blocking conversion of 25-D to 1,25-D, and (2) there is 
less conversion of 25-D to 1,25D because of reduced functioning 
renal mass. The decrease in 1,25D in early CKD may be somewhat 
compensatory, as slowing calcitriol synthesis results in reduced 
phosphorus absorption from the gut, and this in turn reduces the 
phosphorus excretion burden on the dwindling number of neph-
rons. The reduced serum 1,25-D levels also result in reduction of 
gut calcium absorption, and higher serum phosphorus levels can 
result in lower serum calcium levels directly. Thus, some degree 
of mild hypocalcemia is not uncommonly seen in moderate to 
advanced CKD.
The third hormone involved in mineral balance is parathyroid 
hormone. This is a peptide hormone composed of 84 amino acids, 
with the primary binding to its receptor requiring the presence of 
the first two amino acids on the N-terminal of the molecule. The 
main stimulus to PTH secretion is hypocalcemia, which acts on 
calcium-sensing receptors on the parathyroid gland. One of the 
main functions of this hormone is to maintain the serum calcium 
level. PTH does this in a number of ways: (1) PTH decreases the 
reabsorption of phosphorus in the kidney, increasing urinary 
phosphorus excretion. This lowers serum phosphorus, which 
tends to raise the serum calcium; (2) PTH stimulates the activity 
of the 1-α hydroxylase enzyme in the kidney that converts 25-D to 
1,25-D; normally, this results in more calcitriol, and more calcium 
being absorbed via the gut; and (3) PTH increases the rate of bone 
turnover, freeing up calcium from bone. Note that PTH and FGF23 
both act to increase renal phosphorus excretion, but they have 
the opposite effects on the kidney enzyme that makes 1,25D. In a 
feedback loop, secretion of PTH is inhibited by 1,25D acting on cal-
citriol receptors in the parathyroid gland. This feedback loop can 
be exploited physiologically and pharmacologically using calcitriol 
and various analogs of calcitriol to suppress PTH secretion. Finally, 
PTH secretion is stimulated by high serum phosphorus levels.
As the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) declines and as 
 circulating 1,25-D levels decrease, intestinal calcium and phos-
phorus absorption are reduced, thus helping to maintain mineral 
homeostasis. The net effect of the changes in FGF23, calcitriol, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   666 11/10/14   4:03 am
667Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
and PTH during progressive CKD is maintenance of serum cal-
cium and phosphorus within the normal range until stage 4 or 5 
CKD. The low 1,25 D level, the low serum calcium level, and the 
high serum phosphorus level, however, all act to stimulate PTH 
secretion and contribute to worsening hyperparathyroidism. 
With onset of stage 5 CKD and initiation of dialysis, this elegant 
homeostasis system breaks down, leading to very high FGF23 and 
PTH levels, uniformly low calcitriol levels, hyperphosphatemia, 
and low or low normal serum calcium.
These hormonal changes have adverse effects on bone 
physiology, as described below. Hyperphosphatemia, common in 
dialysis patients, contributes to the development of hyperpara-
thyroidism and bone disease, and may play a pathological role in 
the development and progression of cardiovascular disease. High 
serum phosphorus levels may contribute to impaired bone min -
eralization and enhance vascular and other tissue calcification. 
High FGF23 levels, induced by hyperphosphatemia and other fac-
tors, have been shown to induce left ventricular hypertrophy in 
animal models.
 II. CONTROL OF HYPERPHOSPHA TEMIA. The normal range for serum 
phosphorus is 2.7 to 4.6 mg/dL (0.9–1.5 mmol/L). In dialysis 
patients, the KDIGO bone guidelines recommend attempting to 
maintain predialysis phosphorus in the normal range, based on 
observational data that better phosphorus control is associated 
with better outcomes. Also, there are data from animal studies 
showing that hyperphosphatemia stimulates hyperparathyroid -
ism and promotes vascular calcification. In clinical practice, 
most physicians and dietitians strive to maintain predialysis 
phosphorus between 3.0 and 5.5 mg/dL (1.0–1.8 mmol/L).
Hyperphosphatemia occurs in anuric dialysis patients 
because the amount of phosphorus removed during three dialysis 
sessions per week is only a fraction of the phosphorus absorbed 
from the diet. For this reason almost all dialysis patients being 
dialyzed three times per week and eating a normal diet are 
required to ingest some form of phosphorus binder along with 
their food to limit the amount of phosphorus absorbed.
Hypophosphatemia in dialysis patients following a conven -
tional 3-per-week schedule is not the norm and usually is the 
result of markedly reduced food intake unless there was some 
error in drawing the blood (e.g., from the dialyzer outlet instead 
of inlet at the start of dialysis) or unless there was excessive use of 
binders. Patients with persistent predialysis hypophosphatemia 
while off binders usually also have low protein intake, and should 
be counseled to increase dietary protein and phosphorus intake. 
Use of phosphorus supplements (K Phos Neutral, consisting of 
8 mmol (250 mg) phosphorus, 13 mmol sodium, and 1.1 mmol 
potassium, starting at one tab daily) is indicated if the serum 
phosphorus remains below 3.0 mg/dL (1.0 mmol/L).
A. Dietary restriction. Restricting phosphorus in the diet to 800 to 
1,200 mg per day is the key to controlling serum phosphorus. 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   667 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
668
Inorganic phosphates, added as preservatives and flavor 
enhancers to processed foods, are absorbed much more read-
ily than phosphorus in natural food (Gutekunst, 2011). Con-
tinuing patient education by a knowledgeable dietitian is the 
best method to establish and maintain proper dietary habits. 
See Table 36.1 and Appendix B for foods high in phosphorus 
(Moe, 2011; Gutekunst, 2011). Although the phosphorus con-
tent of foods is related to their protein content, phosphorus 
is more readily absorbed from sources of animal protein than 
from those of plant protein (Moe, 2011).
B. Removal of phosphorus by dialysis. Hemodialysis typically removes 
about 800 mg of phosphorus per treatment regardless of pre-
dialysis serum levels. High flux dialyzers and dialyzers with 
larger surface areas, as well as use of hemodiafiltration, can 
increase phosphorus clearance to a modest degree (Penne, 
2010). For hemodialysis, the total weekly time on dialysis is 
the most important factor affecting phosphorus removal. 
After the first hour of dialysis, the intradialysis serum phos-
phorus level tends to stabilize at a low level. This is different 
than what happens with urea, the levels of which continue 
to fall as dialysis is prolonged. The maintained intradialysis 
serum levels of phosphorus cause it to behave somewhat like a 
middle molecule, where even prolonged dialysis sessions con-
tinue to improve phosphorus removal. Dialysis frequency has 
an additional impact on phosphorus removal because during 
the initial hour of dialysis, intradialysis serum phosphorus is 
at a higher level than during the remainder of the treatment. 
The average patient needs 24–28 hours per week of dialysis 
to allow a predialysis serum phosphorus level <4.5 mg (1.45 
mmol/L) without use of phosphorus binders. Patients under -
going frequent and long nocturnal dialysis with weekly dialy-
sis times greater than 24–28 hours per week typically require 
addition of phosphorus to the dialysis solution to prevent 
hypophosphatemia.
Peritoneal dialysis removes approximately 300 mg per 
day of phosphorus when being treated with a CAPD regimen 
of four 2 L exchanges per day. This also is far less than the 
amount of phosphorus absorbed from the diet, and as a result, 
most peritoneal dialysis patients require the use of binders to 
control serum phosphorus levels.
Dairy products (milk, yogurt, cheese)
Organ and processed meat
Beans/peas
Nuts/seeds
Whole-grain breads, bran, and cereals
Many soft drinks (particularly colas)
aSee also Appendix B.
Foods Especially High in Phosphorusa
36.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   668 11/10/14   4:03 am
669Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
C. Residual kidney function.  Residual kidney function contributes 
substantially to phosphorus removal from the body, and 
patients with urine volumes >500 mL per day typically require 
substantially lower amounts of phosphorus binders and 
have lower predialysis serum phosphorus levels than anuric 
patients (Penne, 2011).
D. Phosphorus binders.  Phosphorus binders play an important 
role in phosphorus control in conjunction with dietary 
restriction. These agents work by binding phosphorus in the 
gastrointestinal tract, either by forming an insoluble com-
plex or by binding it into a resin. Despite phosphorus dietary 
restriction and adequate hemodialysis, approximately 90% 
of dialysis patients continue to need oral phosphorous bind -
ers in an effort to control their phosphorus levels. Other 
than simply lowering phosphorus, recent observational data 
have suggested that the use of phosphorus binders may also 
correlate with longer survival and better nutritional status 
for patients on maintenance hemodialysis (Lopes, 2012; 
Cannata-Andia, 2013).
See Table 36.2 for a summary of commonly used phospho-
rus binding agents. One can think of phosphorus binders in 
two broad categories, those that contain calcium (calcium car-
bonate and calcium acetate) and those that do not (sevelamer, 
lanthanum, magnesium carbonate, sucroferric oxyhydroxide, 
ferric citrate, and aluminum-containing compounds).
1. Phosphorus binder equivalent dose:  Using data from various 
comparative studies, one can roughly establish an equiva-
lent dose for various binders relative to the phosphorus 
binding capacity of calcium carbonate (Daugirdas, 2011). 
This so-called phosphorus binding equivalent dose (PBED) 
allows one to compare dosages in patients taking multiple 
binders or different binders. In U.S. patients with minimal 
residual kidney function being dialyzed according to typical 
U.S. practices, PBED averages around 6 g per day (Daugir -
das, 2012). This means that such patients would need 6 g 
per day of calcium carbonate to control their serum phos-
phorus (Table 36.3). The average required PBED is some-
what less, around 4–5 g per day, in smaller patients, those 
with substantial residual renal function, and is also lower in 
women versus men, as women tend to eat less phosphorus-
rich foods such as meats than men.
2. Calcium load associated with some phosphorus binders.  Calcium 
acetate, on a gram-per-gram basis, is about as effective as 
calcium carbonate as a phosphorus binder, but calcium 
acetate contains only 25% calcium by weight, whereas 
calcium carbonate contains 40% calcium by weight. Thus, 
attempting to manage a relatively large, anuric patient 
solely with calcium carbonate would require giving that 
patient 6.0 g of calcium carbonate per day, and 0.4 × 6.0 
= 2.4 g of elemental calcium per day. This is far in excess 
of the maximum total calcium ingestion recommended 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   669 11/10/14   4:03 am
Product Trade Names Dose (mg) per Tablet Elemental Calcium Maximum Dose per Day Comments
Calcium carbonate (Generic, Multiple 
Names)
Multiple doses 40% elemental 
calcium
1.5 g of elemental calcium/d Administered with meals as 
binder; on empty stomach as 
supplementTUMS 500 mg 200 mg/tab As above (7 tablets)
TUMS EX 750 mg 300 mg/tab As above (5 tablets)
TUMS Ultra 1,000 mg 400 mg/tab As above (3 tablets)
TUMS 500 1,250 mg 500 mg/tab As above (3 tablets)
Os-Cal 500 1,250 mg 500 mg/tab As above (3 tablets)
Os-Cal+D 1,250 mg 500 mg/tab As above (3 tablets) 200 IU of vitamin D/tab
Caltrate 600 mg 240 mg/tab As above (6 tablets)
Calcium acetate PhosLo 667 mg 169 mg of elemental 
calcium/tab
As above (9 tablets) More expensive than 
calcium carbonate. 
Prescription medication
Magnesium carbonate 
with calcium carbonate
MagneBind 200: 200 mg MgCO3 with 
400 mg CaCO3
160 mg/tab Dose limited by serum Mg 
levels and diarrhea
85 mg of elemental 
magnesium/tab. Dialysate 
magnesium concentrations 
should be adjusted
Magnesium carbonate 
with calcium carbonate
MagneBind 300: 300 mg MgCO3 with 
250 mg CaCO3
100 mg/tab Dose limited by serum Mg 
levels and diarrhea
85 mg of elemental 
magnesium/tab. Dialysate 
magnesium concentrations 
should be adjusted
Selected Phosphorus Binders
36.2
TABLE
670
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   670 11/10/14   4:03 am
Magnesium carbonate 
+ calcium acetate
Osvaren 435 mg of MgCO3 and 
235 mg of Ca acetate
60 mg/tab Reduction of calcium 
load; Mg may have 
anticalcification properties; 
not available in the US
Lanthanum carbonate Fosrenal 250-mg and 500-mg 
tablets
0 1,250 mg t.i.d. Higher doses 
have not been tested 
long-term
Significantly more expensive 
than other products.Must be 
chewed
Sevelamer carbonate Renvela 400-mg and 800-mg 
tablets and powder
0 Has been tested to 14 g/d in 
normal individuals. Dose may 
be limited by side effect of GI 
discomfort
Significantly more expensive 
than other products
Sucroferric 
oxyhydroxide (PA21)
Velphoro 500 mg 0 3 g/d Designed to minimize iron 
absorption from this iron-
containing binder
Ferric citrate (JTT-751) Not yet assigned 210 mg ferric iron 0 2.5 g/d ferric iron 210 mg elemental iron per 
tablet as 1 g ferric citrate. 
Associated with significant 
increase in serum iron 
markers
671
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   671 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
672
by guidelines issued by Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality 
Initiative (KDOQI) and Kidney Disease: Improving Global 
Outcomes (KDIGO). Using calcium acetate would be asso-
ciated with a somewhat smaller calcium load of 0.25 × 6.0 
= 1.5 g per day. This value is at the upper limit of daily cal-
cium ingestion from both food and binders recommended 
by KDOQI. For this reason, many patients being managed 
with calcium-containing phosphorus binders are treated 
with additional, noncalcium binders.
Another strategy is to combine magnesium and 
 calcium compounds to bind phosphorus. In the United 
States, MagneBind, a mixture of magnesium and calcium 
carbonate is sold as a dietary supplement and is some-
times used off-label as a phosphorus binder. In Europe, a 
magnesium/calcium binder made up of magnesium car -
bonate and calcium acetate (Osvaren) is approved for use 
as a phosphorus binder based on successful clinical trials 
(de Francisco, 2010). As shown in Table 36.3, a 6 g per day 
PBED of Osvaren would be associated with a daily calcium 
load of only 0.5 g per day. In addition to limiting the amount 
of calcium absorbed, magnesium-containing binders have 
at least two potential beneficial effects: (1) magnesium is 
an anticalcification factor, and it might retard vascular 
calcification in dialysis patients, although the evidence 
for this is limited (Spiegel, 2009); (2) mortality tends to be 
reduced in dialysis patients with higher serum magnesium 
levels, although it is not clear that magnesium supplemen-
tation beyond achievement of physiological serum levels 
is beneficial. Magnesium overload is something that one 
needs to watch for in any dialysis patient ingesting sources 
of magnesium.
A more effective strategy to eliminate the problem 
of calcium absorption from phosphorus binders is to use 
one of the newer binders that contain no calcium. Guide -
line groups recommend avoiding calcium-containing 
phosphorus binders in patients prone to vascular calci -
fication, or with evidence of vascular calcification; this 
is hard to do, as the great majority of dialysis patients, 
especially patients with diabetes, will have evidence of 
calcification on abdominal X-ray or on visualization of 
the heart valves.
3. Dosing relative to meals.  Phosphorus binders are much more 
effective when they are ingested with meals, and where 
the amount of binder given corresponds to the phos-
phorus load of each meal (Schiller, 1989). Some of the 
binders require ingestion of multiple pills, while reduc -
ing the number of pills by making them larger can make 
swallowing them more difficult. This has been addressed 
partially with some binders by making them chewable, 
or else supplying them as a powder that can be sprinkled 
over food.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   672 11/10/14   4:03 am
Phosphorus Binder Unit dose size (mg)
Phosphate Binder 
Equivalent Dose of 
One Tablet to 1 g Ca 
Carbonate
Dose of Binder Needed 
to Reach a PBED of 
6 g/d 
Approximate Number of 
Tablets to Reach PBED of  
6 g/d
Gram of Calcium in a 
6-g PBED dose
Calcium carbonate 750 0.75 6.0 8 2.4
Calcium acetate 667 0.67 6.0 9 1.5
Osvaren (Mg carbonate + Ca 
acetate)
435/235a 0.75 — 8 0.5
Lanthanum 500b 1.0 3.0 6 0
Sevelamer carbonate 800 0.60 8.0 10 0
Sucroferric Oxyhydroxide 
(Velphoro)
500 1.6 1.5 3.75 0
Ferric citrate 210 0.64 2.0 9 0
The equivalent dose of PA21 is based on a single randomized controlled trial versus sevelamer (Floege, 2014), and thus the equivalent dose is not as precise as for some of the other binders, where 
multiple studies were considered.
Ferric citrate numbers were obtained from a single clinical randomized controlled trial vs sevelamer and calcium acetate (Lewis, 2014); Osvaren is not available in the United States.
a Each tablet contains 435-mg Mg carbonate and 235-mg Ca acetate.
b Tablets are sold by weight of lanthanum and not of lanthanum carbonate.
Dosages of Selected Phosphorus Binders Required to Reach a Phosphorus Binder Equivalent Dose (PBED) of 6.0 g per day
36.3
TABLE
673
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   673 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
674
 III. SELECTED PHOSPHORUS BINDING DRUGS
A. Calcium-containing compounds. These agents are often used in the 
initial management of hyperphosphatemia based on a profile 
of effective phosphorus binding and low cost. They may also 
be useful when some degree of calcium supplementation is 
desired. However, dose titration is limited by KDIGO recom-
mendations that elemental calcium ingestion should generally 
not exceed 1.5 g per day. In addition, dialysis solution calcium 
concentration should be limited to 2.25 to 2.5 mEq/L (1.12 to 
1.25 mM) to avoid positive calcium balance during dialysis. 
The coadministration of calcium and active vitamin D prepa-
rations predisposes up to 50% of patients to hypercalcemia, 
and this practice warrants close monitoring (Schaefer, 1992).
1. Calcium Carbonate  (40% elemental calcium by weight) is 
available in a variety of preparations and dose sizes, includ-
ing TUMS (200 mg of elemental calcium with the regular 
tablet formulation), Caltrate (240 mg of elemental calcium/
tab), and OsCal 500 (500 mg of elemental calcium/tab). 
A reasonable starting dose is 1–2 tablets with each meal. 
However, the use of more than 1.5 g of elemental calcium 
per day exposes patients to excessive calcium loading and 
the risk of hypercalcemia, and so it is usually impossible to 
control phosphorus with calcium carbonate alone without 
very substantially exceeding the maximum recommended 
targets for calcium ingestion.
Calcium carbonate is available typically as a swallowed 
tablet, although TUMS does come in chewable formula -
tions. It should be noted that calcium carbonate dissoci-
ates best in an acidic environment, and consequently its 
solubility can be inhibited by medications such as proton 
pump inhibitors. This agent has the benefit of easy acces-
sibility and low cost. Common side effects include hyper -
calcemia, constipation, and nausea.
2. Calcium acetate  (PhosLo, 25% elemental calcium by weight) 
is available in 667 mg tablets (169 mg of elemental cal-
cium), and the recommended initial dose is two tablets 
with each meal. Upward titration may be necessary every 
2–3 weeks to establish adequate phosphorus control to a 
maximum daily dose of 1.5 g of elemental calcium. On a mg 
calcium carbonate versus  mg calcium acetate basis, effi-
cacy of the two drugs as phosphorus binders appears to be 
similar. However, because calcium acetate is 25% calcium 
while calcium carbonate is 40% calcium, calcium acetate 
use is associated with less calcium loading. Still, to achieve 
a PBED of 6 g per day, use of calcium acetate alone engen-
ders the administration of 1.5 g per day of elemental cal -
cium. Administration is a swallowed tablet, and side effects 
include hypercalcemia, nausea, and constipation,
B. Sevelamer carbonate (Renvela) is a nonaluminum-, noncalcium- 
 based phosphorus binder that traps phosphorus in the bowel 
through ion exchange and hydrogen binding. The drug is 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   674 11/10/14   4:03 am
675Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
available in 400- and 800-mg tablets, and granule packets, 
and should be started at 800–1,600 mg three times per day 
with meals. It can be titrated upward to a maximum of 13g 
per day to attain necessary phosphorus control, though this 
may require a significant pill load and financial burden for the 
patient. It is recommended to give other drugs 1 hour before 
or 3 hours after sevelamer administration. The absence of 
calcium makes sevelamer  useful for those predisposed to 
hypercalcemia and those already at the limit of calcium sup-
plementation. Sevelamer may also have pleiotropic, beneficial 
anti-inflammatory effects in dialysis patients that are not com-
pletely mediated by LDL cholesterol reduction (Rastogi, 2013).
The main side effects of sevelamer are nausea, diarrhea, 
dyspepsia, and constipation. Sevelamer use may lead to hypo-
calcemia, which should be treated with supplemental calcium.
C. Lanthanum Carbonate (Fosrenol) became available in the United 
States in 2005. As a trivalent cation, lanthanum binds phos-
phorus ionically. It is a noncalcium, nonaluminum-based 
binder. It is available in 250-, 500-, 750-, and 1,000-mg chew-
able tablets that may also be crushed. A reasonable starting 
dose is 500 mg three times per day with upward titration as 
needed, but not to exceed 1,250 mg three times per day. Very 
little lanthanum is absorbed, and to date there has been no 
evidence of toxic accumulation or adverse effects on bone 
metabolism (Hutchison, 2009). Its main side effects are similar 
to the other phosphorus binders and are related to GI discom-
fort. The chewable preparation may be convenient for patients 
with a large swallowed pill load, but difficult for patients with 
poor dentition. In a large prospective randomized European 
multicenter comparator trial, the efficacy of lanthanum car -
bonate was compared with that of calcium carbonate. Phos-
phorus control was similar in both groups; however, there was 
a significantly lower incidence of hypercalcemia in the lantha-
num carbonate group, which makes it particularly useful in 
individuals at risk for hypercalcemia (Hutchison, 2005).
Both lanthanum and sevelamer are notably more expen-
sive than other available phosphorus binders. Although the 
long-term safety of lanthanum carbonate has been called into 
question, subsequent reports over 1, 3, and 6 years have demon-
strated a satisfactory long-term safety profile (Hutchison, 2009).
D. Magnesium/calcium binders.  These include Magnebind (magne-
sium carbonate plus calcium carbonate), which is sometimes 
given off-label in the United States, and Osvaren (magnesium 
carbonate plus calcium acetate), which has been approved for 
use in dialysis patients in Europe. The potential benefits, as 
well as minor risks, of giving magnesium in this context have 
been discussed above.
E. Sucroferric oxyhydroxide (P A21 or Velphoro).  PA21 is an iron-  
containing phosphorus binder that contains no calcium or 
aluminum. PA21 completed Phase 3 clinical trials in hemo-
dialysis patients and was approved for use as a phosphorus 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   675 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
676
binder in the United States in 2013 (Floege, 2014). It comes as 
a 500-mg chewable tablet; the starting dose is 1.5 g per day 
(3 tablets per day with meals) with a suggested maximum dose 
of 3 g per day. In contrast to ferric citrate, which is another 
iron-based phosphorus binder described below, Velphoro is 
associated with only minimal oral iron absorption.
F. Ferric citrate. Ferric citrate is an iron-based phosphate binder 
that contains no calcium or aluminum. Ferric citrate has been 
approved for both CKD and ESKD patients in Japan (Yokoyama, 
2014a, 2014b) and was approved in the United States in 2014 
based on the results of a Phase 3 52-week clinical trial (Lewis, 
2014). Ferric citrate comes as a tablet containing 210 mg ferric 
iron as 1 g ferric citrate and can be titrated to its maximum dose 
of 12 tablets/day (2.5 g ferric iron/day). Patients treated with  ferric 
citrate demonstrated significant improvement in serum iron 
measures (TSAT, ferritin) in addition to a reduced need for IV iron 
(∼50% less IV iron requirement than in control patients treated 
with non-iron phosphorus binders) and reduced need for eryth-
ropoiesis stimulating agents (∼24% less than control patients 
treated with non-iron phosphorus binders) while still maintain-
ing hemoglobin. The tablet size and relative phosphorus binding 
ability are shown in Tables 36-2 and 36-3. Ferric citrate may prove 
highly effective as dual therapy in hyperphosphatemic patients 
that require iron repletion. However, in patients where iron load-
ing is a concern, ferric citrate may not be an optimal choice.
G. Aluminum carbonate and aluminum hydroxide.  Aluminum-based 
binders were the primary therapy for hyperphosphatemia 
until the mid-1980’s, when the accumulation of aluminum to 
toxic levels was found to result in hematologic, neurologic, 
and bone complications. Consequently, these agents should 
no longer be used chronically. Usage of aluminum-based ther-
apies for short periods may be necessary to reduce severely 
elevated phosphorus and calcium × phosphorus products in 
patients with severe hyperparath yroidism and/or concurrent 
hypercalcemia. They are also still an important tool for hyper-
phosphatemia control in developing countries (Mudge, 2011). 
Co-ingestion of citrate (Shohl’s solution, calcium citrate, fruit 
juices, Alka-Selzer) greatly enhances aluminum absorption 
and can lead to acute aluminum neurotoxicity.
H. Use of more than one phosphorus binder. Combined treatment with 
different types of phosphorus binders may be advantageous and 
cost effective. Regimens should be individually tailored to each 
patient. Combinations should take into account the patient’s 
medication preferences, side effect tolerance, and financial 
considerations. Total daily exposure to elemental calcium and 
magnesium should also factor into the choice of agents used. 
The combination of calcium- and non–  calcium-based agents 
may provide target phosphorus control and calcium supple-
mentation without risking excess exposure to calcium.
 I V. OPTIMIZING SERUM CALCIUM. The normal range for serum calcium is 
8.4 to 10.2 mg/dL (2.10–2.55 mmol/L), and the KDIGO guidelines 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   676 11/10/14   4:03 am
677Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
recommend maintaining predialysis total calcium within this 
range. There is great patient variability in the calcium set point 
(the calcium level at which PTH secretion is 50% of maximum).
Serum calcium circulates in a free (ionized) and a protein-
bound state. Total calcium reported on standard lab tests reflects 
both of these circulating forms. Protein-bound calcium is propor-
tional to the concentration of albumin, which accounts for most 
of the protein binding. On average, total calcium falls by 0.8  mg / dL 
for every 1.0 g/dL (0.20 mmol/L for every 1.0 g/L) decrease in 
albumin. Consequently, in hypoalbuminemia, the total calcium 
reported from the laboratory can be corrected by using the 
equation:
Corrected calcium (in mg/dL) =  total calcium + (0.8 ×  
(4.0 − albumin [in g/dL]))
Corrected calcium (in mmol/L) =  total calcium + (0.20 ×  
(40 − albumin [in g/L]))
In most new dialysis patients, corrected and ionized cal-
cium concentrations are usually slightly low or in the low normal 
range. Calculation of corrected calcium can be used to estimate 
whether a hypoalbuminemic patient’s serum calcium is high, 
normal, or low. Unfortunately, corrected calcium is dependent 
on which albumin assay is employed, and has been shown to be 
no more accurate than total calcium in predicting whether ion-
ized calcium is high, normal, or low (Gauci, 2008). Therefore, 
in dialysis practice, use of total calcium is recommended, and 
determination of ionized calcium is indicated when the result 
could change management. Differing from the older KDOQI 
bone guidelines, KDIGO does not recommend the routine use of 
albumin-corrected calcium.
A. Hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia is usually due to excessive use 
of calcium-based binders and/or to use of vitamin D receptor 
agonists that increase gut calcium absorption. Patients with 
low PTH appear to have the highest range of serum calcium, 
which may reflect adynamic bone disease (see below) and poor 
ability of bone to buffer calcium. Advanced hyperparathyroid-
ism associated with a large mass of autonomous parathyroid 
tissue can rarely result in hypercalcemia in the absence of oral 
calcium administration or the use of active vitamin D. This is 
referred to as tertiary hyperparathyroidism.
B. Hypocalcemia. Low levels of total uncorrected calcium are often 
due to a low serum albumin. A low corrected calcium may 
be due to poor gastrointestinal absorption of calcium due to 
vitamin D deficiency, severe hyperphosphatemia, or use of the 
calcimimetic agent, cinacalcet.
C. Dialysis solution calcium concentration.  Dialysis solution calcium 
should generally be 2.5 mEq/L (1.25 mM) in most patients 
on chronic hemodialysis. This will usually maintain a neu -
tral calcium balance. Cautious use of a 2.25 mEq/L (1.12 mM) 
calcium bath or lower can be used to control chronically high 
serum calcium or to stimulate PTH secretion in patients with 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   677 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
678
chronically low PTH. Use of these lower calcium baths can 
exacerbate hyperparathyroidism, however, and lead to bone 
demineralization. Use of very low calcium dialysis solutions 
also has been linked to an increased risk of QTc dispersion and 
sudden death (see Chapter 11).
Peritoneal dialysis fluid calcium concentration should be 
2.5 mEq/L (1.25 mM) in most patients. A 3.5 mEq/L (1.75 mM) 
dialysate is available, but should be reserved for patients with 
a chronically low calcium that the clinician has determined 
warrants therapy. Higher dialysate calcium concentration, 
especially when used in conjunction with calcium-based phos-
phorus binders, creates a chronically positive calcium balance, 
suppresses PTH, and may contribute to vascular and tissue 
calcification.
 V. OPTIMIZING SERUM LEVELS OF 25-D (25-H YDROxYCHOLECALCIFEROL). 
25-D (25-hydroxycholecalciferol) is synthesized by the liver from 
cholecalciferol and reflects vitamin stores. These are frequently 
low in dialysis patients. Several factors likely account for the 
high incidence of deficiency, including poor sun exposure in ill 
patients, restriction of vitamin D–fortified dairy products for 
purposes of phosphorus control, and the high prevalence of Black 
patients who are frequently lactose intolerant and whose dark 
pigmentation reduces effective vitamin D formation upon ultra -
violet light exposure. However, Black patients also appear to have 
lower D-binding protein levels in the blood, leading to a higher 
ratio of bioactive ( free) hormone to bound hormone. Therefore, 
Blacks may not have the frequency and severity of vitamin D defi-
ciency that standard testing suggests.
Treatment of vitamin D deficiency is appropriate despite 
the loss of adequate 1-alpha-hydroxylase activity in the kidney, 
as other tissues possess this enzyme and produce calcitriol for 
autocrine and paracrine actions. Treatment has also been shown 
to increase endogenous calcitriol levels, though not usually to 
normal (Jen, 2010). Treatment should replete, then maintain ade-
quate stores. Vitamin D stores are assessed by measuring 25-OH 
vitamin D in the blood. Levels >30 ng/mL (>75 nmol/L) are con-
sidered normal, while levels <30 ng/mL (<75 nmol/L) warrant 
treatment with ergocalciferol or cholecalciferol.
Treatment of low serum 25-D levels differs between the 
United States and other countries. The most logical treatment is 
to give the natural precursor to 25-D, which is cholecalciferol, a 
compound derived from animal sources. Cholecalciferol is widely 
available in the United States as a food supplement, but not as an 
FDA-approved pharmaceutical that is reimbursable. While there 
is no recommended daily intake for cholecalciferol to maintain 
stores, 800 to 2,000 IU per day is likely sufficient and safe. In the 
United States, ergocalciferol is available as a prescription drug. 
Ergocalciferol, a plant-based sterol, differs from cholecalciferol 
slightly in terms of structure, but it is hydroxylated by the liver 
at the 25 position and then dihydroxylated at the 1-α  position to 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   678 11/10/14   4:03 am
679Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
yield a biologically active compound similar in action to calcitriol. 
Ergocalciferol is commonly called vitamin D 2, while cholecalcif -
erol is called vitamin D 3. Most (but not all) assays of serum 25-D 
levels detect both the 25-D2 and 25-D3 compounds. Ergocalciferol 
can be given as large weekly or monthly doses, or smaller daily 
doses, and the dose administered should be proportional to the 
severity of the deficiency, and the size and adiposity of the patient. 
We commonly prescribe 50,000 IU/ month for 6 months when lev-
els are 15–29 ng/mL (37–72 nmol/L), and 50,000 IU weekly for 2 
to 3 months, then 50,000 IU monthly when levels are < 15 ng/mL 
(<37 nmol/L). Obese patients will generally require larger doses 
or longer repletion due to the fat soluble nature of the vitamin.
 VI. BONE DISEASE IN CKD. Bone normally undergoes a coordinated turn-
over, with osteoblast cells producing new bone matrix proteins 
(osteoid) that undergo mineralization, coupled with the activity 
of osteoclasts that causes bone resorption. The pathological clas-
sification of renal osteodystrophy is based on both the static and 
the dynamic histological parameters obtained by transiliac bone 
biopsy. Evaluation of the biopsy for Turnover rate, Mineralization, 
and Volume, the so-called TMV system, has been proposed as the 
best method for classifying renal bone disease. Fluorescent labels, 
tetracycline and demeclocycline, are deposited along the lines of 
mineralization. Administration of such labels for one to three days 
followed two to three weeks later by the repeat administration 
of label allows for the determination of the rate of bone forma-
tion. With high bone turnover, for example, the distance between 
the two labels would be increased. Mineralization is evaluated 
by examining the osteoid volume, increased osteoid maturation 
time, or increased mineralization lag time. Bone volume is prone 
to greatest error because with bone biopsy only a single location 
is sampled. Any aluminum deposition is tested for by staining the 
biopsy sample with acid solochrome azurine.
A. Osteitis fibrosa. This form of renal osteodystrophy occurs when 
PTH is persistently high. It is characterized by accelerated 
formation and resorption of bone due to an increased num-
ber and activity of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, and increased 
marrow fibrosis. The severity of osteitis fibrosa is roughly pro-
portional to the degree and duration of PTH elevation. Mild 
osteitis fibrosa is probably preferable to adynamic bone (see 
below) in that bone strength is greater and there is less altera-
tion in mineral metabolism. When osteitis fibrosa is severe, 
bone is laid down so rapidly that it is not properly mineral-
ized or structured. In such cases, the amount of unmineralized 
bone (osteoid) is increased. The alignment of the collagen is 
irregular instead of in the usual lamellar pattern. This “woven” 
bone may become mineralized as amorphous calcium phos-
phorus rather than hydroxyapatite. The resulting bone is more 
prone to fracture.
The most prominent symptoms of severe osteitis fibrosa 
are bone and joint discomfort. Metastatic calcification with 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   679 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
680
periarticular calcium deposits may lead to acute joint inflam -
mation or pain and stiffness.
Radiological findings are usually absent in mild disease 
but are always present in severe hyperparathyroidism. As such, 
bone films are not generally recommended for the assessment 
of bone disease in dialysis patients. Hand films most reliably 
demonstrate changes of hyperparathyroidism. The character -
istic finding is bone loss (resorption) in the subperiosteal area, 
best seen on the radial side of the second and third phalanges. 
Associated erosion of the tuft of the distal phalanx also may 
be visible and, when severe, may lead to blunting of the finger-
tip. The latter changes are pathognomonic of present or past 
osteitis fibrosa. Evidence of bone resorption also may be seen 
elsewhere in the skeleton, including the skull, giving it a “salt-
and-pepper” appearance, and in the long bones, particularly 
the lesser trochanter of the femur.
Disorganized, accelerated bone formation is associated 
with osteitis fibrosa and may be visible radiologically as osteo-
sclerosis. Bone scanning using technetium radiopharmaceuti-
cals will show increased skeletal uptake of isotope. The bone/
soft tissue ratio of isotope uptake will be increased; however, 
bone scans generally add little to the diagnostic evaluation of 
osteitis fibrosa.
B. Adynamic bone.  Adynamic bone disease is characterized by 
reduced osteoblast and osteoclast number and low or absent 
bone formation rate as measured by tetracycline labeling. The 
osteoid thickness is normal or reduced, distinguishing it from 
osteomalacia. Associated laboratory findings may include 
an iPTH less than 100 pg/mL (11 pmol/L), low serum bone-
specific alkaline phosphatase, and, occasionally, a slightly ele-
vated serum ionized calcium level. Vertebral and peripheral 
bone densities tend to be normal or low.
The causes of adynamic bone histology are unknown, but 
persistently low ( for dialysis patients) PTH levels play a major 
etiologic role. Predisposed are the elderly, women, those with 
diabetes, and subjects of the Caucasian race. Adynamic bone is 
more common in peritoneal dialysis patients, as is a low PTH. 
Use of dialysis solution calcium concentration of 2.5 mEq/L 
(1.25 mM) may reduce the prevalence of adynamic bone and 
PTH oversuppression. Aluminum is now a rare cause of ady-
namic bone disease.
Initially thought to be asymptomatic and not requiring 
treatment, adynamic bone is now known to be associated with 
a higher fracture rate than osteitis fibrosa. Adynamic bone is 
also associated with hypercalcemia (likely due to impaired 
ability of the bone to buffer serum calcium), and vascular and 
other soft tissue calcification. Symptoms, such as pain from 
nontraumatic fractures, are usually absent until the disease is 
advanced.
C. Osteomalacia. Like adynamic bone disease, osteomalacia repre-
sents a state of low bone turnover. It differs, however, because 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   680 11/10/14   4:03 am
681Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
of the presence of large amounts of unmineralized osteoid. In 
the absence of renal failure, vitamin D deficiency is the most 
common cause of osteomalacia and should be considered in 
dialysis patients with low bone mass and frequent fractures. 
This lesion was first described in patients with aluminum 
overload, wherein bone aluminum accumulation prevented 
bone mineralization and also suppressed PTH secretion. With 
recognition of its toxicity, aluminum is now rarely used as a 
long-term phosphorus binder, and properly treated dialysis 
solution is free of aluminum. Consequently, the incidence of 
aluminum-induced osteomalacia has decreased substantially. 
Rarely, osteomalacia has been ascribed to iron overload.
D. Mixed Lesions.  Some patients display histologic evidence of 
both osteitis fibrosa and osteomalacia on bone biopsy. Such 
patients frequently have high PTH levels and impaired bone 
formation and mineralization. In the past, this condition 
was often found in patients with concomitant aluminum 
poisoning.
E. Osteoporosis. The age of patients at the time of starting dialy-
sis continues to increase. Many have preexisting osteoporosis 
documented with bone densitometry. Medical interventions 
used routinely for osteoporosis include bisphosphonates, 
selective or nonselective estrogens, teriparatide (Forteo) if the 
PTH is persistently low, and vitamin D. None of these treat -
ments have been tested for efficacy and safety in the hemodi-
alysis population. Caution should be used before prescribing 
these medications to dialysis patients with osteoporosis.
VII. PARATHYROID HORMONE LEVELS
A. PTH assays. Parathyroid hormone is an 84 amino acid peptide
(PTH(1-84)) that activates a signaling cascade via the PTH1 
receptor present on a variety of tissues. The N-terminal por -
tion of the peptide is essential for binding and receptor activa-
tion, while large portions of the C-terminal are not. Fragments 
of PTH are rapidly cleared by the kidney and accumulate in 
renal failure. Most fragments cannot activate the PTH1 recep-
tor owing to loss of portions of the N-terminus; however, these 
fragments were usually detected by single-antibody radioim-
munoassays employed in the 1980s.
The so-called intact PTH (iPTH) assays use two separate 
antibodies to identify “intact” PTH molecules: these assays 
include a “capture” antibody that reacts to the midregion of 
the molecule, and a “detection” antibody that binds near the 
biologically active N-terminus. Use of such “intact” PTH assays 
greatly diminishes, but does not eliminate, interference of PTH 
fragments. Initially, it was thought that such dual antibody 
assays bound to PTH(1-84) only . However, several incomplete 
PTH fragments, including the fragment PTH (7-84), are also 
bound by this assay, and these incomplete fragments account 
for as much as half of the PTH measured in dialysis patients by 
the first generation “intact” PTH group of assays.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   681 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
682
There are numerous commercial iPTH assays available, 
and the contribution of inactive PTH fragments to the total 
PTH measurement varies greatly. Consequently, in dialysis 
patients, different assays can lead to very different iPTH results 
(Souberbielle, 2006; Cavalier, 2012), and at higher iPTH values, 
the discrepancy in results becomes even greater. This large 
interassay variability means no specific PTH target can apply 
to all assays, and use of different assays in the same patient 
(such as a hospital test versus a dialysis center test) can lead 
to different interpretations.
Some assays employ a detection antibody that binds at or 
very near the first amino acid, and are referred to as “biPTH", 
“bio-intact PTH”, or “whole PTH”. As these assays are thought 
to bind exclusively to PTH(1-84), measured levels are approxi-
mately 55% of the corresponding iPTH values. In theory such 
“bio-intact” assays should be superior to the “intact” PTH 
assays. Clinical practice, however, has not demonstrated 
that these assays are superior. Most laboratories continue to 
employ the iPTH assay, and the 2009 KDIGO bone guidelines 
recommend continued use of the “intact” iPTH assay rather 
than the theoretically more precise “bio-intact” 1-84 versions.
B. PTH target values. The purpose of treating hyperparathyroidism 
in dialysis patients is to prevent the development of severe 
hyperparathyroidism that can cause severe bone disease and 
fractures, and contribute to tissue calcification. Medical man-
agement of hyperparathyroidism is also intended to reduce 
the need for surgical parathyroidectomy.
The treatment goals should be balanced against the risks 
of medical interventions. Overtreatment of hyperparathyroid-
ism can induce adynamic bone disease, which predisposes 
patients to hypercalcemia and vascular calcification.
The 2009 KDIGO bone guidelines recognized the lack of 
sufficient outcomes trials to make firm recommendations on 
the management of hyperparathyroidism in dialysis patients. 
They recommend balancing the potential benefits of treatments 
against the known and potential risks. In dialysis patients, they 
recommend maintaining a stable PTH level over time, generally 
in a range of two to nine times the upper limit of normal ( for most 
assays this is approximately 150 to 600 pg/mL [16–64 pmol/L]), 
while avoiding hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. This range is 
broader than the older KDOQI guideline recommendation of 
150–300 pg/mL (16–32 pmol/L; about two to four times the upper 
limit of normal). The higher target range was recommended 
because the narrower KDOQI target appeared to lead to oversup-
pression of bone turnover and hypercalcemia in many patients.
Dialysis patients should not have iPTH maintained below 
150 pg/mL (16 pmol/L), as there is a high likelihood of induc-
ing adynamic bone disease. Persistently low PTH values are 
more likely with overuse of active vitamin D, cinacalcet, and 
calcium-based phosphorus binders, as well as with use of high 
calcium dialysis solutions, (e.g., >3.0 mEq/L [1.5 mM]).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   682 11/10/14   4:03 am
683Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
Clinicians should remember that in an individual patient, 
PTH in a given range does not always correlate with the bone 
disease. Adynamic bone disease has been found in patients 
with PTH values above the target range, osteitis fibrosa is not 
uncommon in patients with PTH levels maintained in the tar-
get range (although its severity is usually mild), and osteomala-
cia is due to vitamin D deficiency and has little correlation with 
PTH. Clinical events (e.g., fractures, hypercalcemia) that do not 
correlate with the results of repeated PTH measures warrant 
further evaluation.
C. Serum bone and total alkaline phosphatase.  The KDIGO guidelines 
also suggest monitoring another marker of high bone turn -
over, such as bone alkaline phosphatase. In clinical practice, 
this is an expensive test to obtain, and few centers routinely 
measure it. Normalization of serum alkaline phosphatase, of 
which bone alkaline phosphatase is a component, may serve 
as a secondary indicator that the patient does not have high 
bone turnover, though it is not predictive of whether ady-
namic bone disease is present.
Serum total alkaline phosphatase is frequently elevated in 
dialysis patients, usually due to elevation of bone-specific alka-
line phosphatase due to osteitis fibrosa from hyperparathy-
roidism. However, alkaline phosphatase originates from other 
tissues, the most important being liver, intestine, and kidney. 
Bone alkaline phosphatase can be measured when the source 
of a high serum alkaline phosphatase is in doubt. Alternatively, 
an elevation of gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) suggests 
the increase in alkaline phosphatase may be due to liver dis-
ease, and evaluation of the liver and gall bladder is indicated. 
If GGT is normal, hyperparathyroid bone disease is likely the 
cause of the elevated alkaline phosphatase, and more inten-
sive treatment may be indicated. In dialysis patients, both total 
alkaline phosphatase and bone-specific alkaline phosphatase 
levels are usually elevated in severe hyperparathyroidism and 
improve during successful treatment. In clinical practice, a 
PTH value that is two to nine times the upper limit of normal 
and a normal serum total alkaline phosphatase suggests that 
hyperparathyroid bone disease is either mild or absent, and 
therefore intensification of present therapy to suppress PTH 
may not be indicated.
D. Methods of lowering or raising serum PTH. As discussed in the open-
ing pages of this chapter, the reasons for hyperparathyroidism 
in CKD are a low level of 1,25-D (1,25-D suppresses the para-
thyroid gland), low levels of serum calcium (hypocalcemia 
stimulates the parathyroid gland to produce PTH), and high 
levels of serum phosphorus (phosphorus stimulates the para-
thyroid gland). Accordingly, stimulating the vitamin D recep-
tor, raising the serum calcium or activating the parathyroid 
gland calcium-sensing receptor by other means, or reducing 
serum phosphorus, could all be expected to lower serum PTH. 
Raising the serum calcium to the upper limit of the normal 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   683 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
684
range, once popular, is no longer recommended for fear of pre-
cipitating or worsening vascular calcification.
If the serum PTH is below the desired level, reducing the 
dose of PTH-suppressing drugs (such as vitamin D receptor 
activators or cinacalcet) or lowering the serum calcium slightly 
(e.g., by lowering dialysis solution calcium or avoiding calcium-
containing phosphorus binders) can be expected to increase 
PTH levels.
E. Vitamin D receptor activators.  Active vitamin D (calcitriol) and 
vitamin D receptor agonists (see Table 36.4) suppress serum 
PTH in a dose-dependent fashion. The higher the pretreat -
ment PTH, the larger the dose required to suppress PTH into 
the desired range. The medications are usually given intrave-
nously during each dialysis, but can be given orally, usually two 
to three times a week. Because these drugs can increase gut 
absorption of phosphorus, they should be given cautiously to 
patients with hyperphosphatemia, and preferably only after 
elevated serum phosphorus levels have been somewhat con -
trolled. A number of observational studies have suggested that 
use of calcitriol or vitamin D receptor agonist is associated 
with increased survival (Duranton, 2013), but randomized 
outcome trials to confirm this observation have not yet been 
done.
1. Calcitriol (Calcijex; Rocaltrol) or 1,25(OH) 2D3 is a synthetic
form of the natural compound, and is usually started at 1–2 
mcg IV with each hemodialysis or orally two to three times 
per week in patients treated with peritoneal dialysis. This
drug is usually the least expensive formulation of the active 
vitamin D compounds.
2. Paricalcitol (Zemplar) or 19-Nor-1,25(OH) 2D2 is a vitamin
D analog that has less hypercalcemic and hyperphospha -
temic actions in animal studies. In humans, the evidence of 
superiority over calcitriol is more limited. A large historical 
cohort study did find improved survival in dialysis patients 
receiving paricalcitol compared with calcitriol (Teng,
2003). The initial dose in mcg per dialysis treatment can
be estimated by dividing the pretreatment iPTH by 120. An 
oral formulation of paricalcitol is also available for patients 
with CKD or patients on peritoneal dialysis. A starting dose 
of 1 mcg daily or 2 mcg three times a week can  be admin -
istered to patients with an iPTH less than or equal to 500
pg/mL (53 pmol/L). An initial dose of 2 mcg daily or 4 mcg
three times a week can  be started in patients with iPTH
greater than 500 pg/mL (53 pmol/L).
3. Doxercalciferol (Hectorol) or 1α(OH)D 2 is a vitamin D
prohormone that is metabolized by the liver to active
1,25(OH)
2D2. Initial dosing is 2.5–5.0 mcg intravenously or
orally each dialysis treatment.
Dose adjustments of active vitamin D products for 
PTH control are based on subsequent PTH determina-
tions, which initially should be performed up to monthly 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   684 11/10/14   4:03 am
685Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
Medication Trade 
Name
Route Dosing 
Information
Comments
Calcitriol Rocaltrol PO Starting dose: 
0.25 mcg daily 
or 0.5 mcg three 
times per week
Dose range: 
0.25–2 mcg daily
Available in 
0.25- and 0.5-mcg 
tablets
Monitor calcium 
and phosphorus at 
least monthly
Calcijex IV 0.02 mcg/kg (or 
1–2 mcg) given 
three times 
weekly
Titrate by 0.5–1 
mcg every 2–4 
weeks
Doxercalciferol Hectorol PO Starting dose: 
2.5–5.0 mcg three 
times per week
Titrate by 2.5 mcg 
q8 wk
Available in 2.5 
mcg tablets
A vitamin D 
prohormone that 
is metabolized in 
the liver to active 
1,25(OH)2vitamin D2. 
Oral administration 
in dialysis 
patients is more 
hypercalcemic and 
hyperphosphatemic 
than IV 
administration
Hectorol IV Starting dose: 
2.5–5.0 mcg three 
times per week
Titrate by 1–2 
mcg q8 wk
Paricalcitol Zemplar PO Dosing: 1–2 mcg 
daily or 2–4 mcg 
on a thrice-
weekly regimen.
Titrate by 1-mcg 
increments on the 
daily schedule, 
or by 2 mcg on 
the thrice-weekly 
schedule
Causes minimal 
alterations in 
calcium and 
phosphorus, 
comparable to 
placebo
Zemplar IV 0.04–0.1 mcg/
kg or give dose 
in mcg equal 
to biPTH/40 or 
iPTH/80 three 
times per week
Titrate by 30%–
50% at 4-week 
intervals
The IV preparation 
can also be 
administered on 
a once-weekly 
regimen based 
on the cumulative 
weekly dose
Characteristics of Commonly used Vitamin D Analogs
36.4
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   685 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
686
to  establish control, then reassessed quarterly. If hypercal-
cemia (calcium >10.2 mg/dL [2.55 mmol/L]) develops, the 
dose should be decreased by 30%–50% or held until the 
 hypercalcemia resolves then restarted at a lower dose.
F. Calcimimetics bind to the calcium sensing receptor on the 
parathyroid gland, making it more responsive to the ambient 
ionized calcium; this results in suppression of PTH, a marked 
decrease in serum calcium, and a slight decrease in serum 
phosphorus. Unlike active vitamin D products, calcimimetics 
result in a decrease in serum calcium and phosphorus. Cina-
calcet (Sensipar), the only calcimimetic presently available, is 
a pill available in 30, 60, and 90 mg. Maximal PTH suppres-
sion of 60 to 80% occurs 2 to 4 hours after each dose, and 30 to 
50% suppression at 24 hours is observed in about two-thirds 
of patients. Serum PTH should be measured 12 to 24 hours 
after a dose. The initial dose of cinacalcet should be 30 mg 
daily regardless of serum PTH, and should not be initiated if 
the calcium is <8.4 mg/dL (<2.1 mmol/L). The dose should 
be increased by 30-mg increments to a maximum of 180 mg 
per day, based on monthly or quarterly PTH results, provided 
the corrected calcium is >7.8 mg/dL (1.95 mmol/L). A fall 
in serum calcium accompanies PTH suppression, and hypo-
calcemia of <7.5 mg/dL (1.87 mmol/L) occurs in about 5% 
of patients. Hypocalcemia is rarely symptomatic and can be 
managed by addition of 500 to 1,000 mg of elemental calcium 
on an empty stomach, an increase or addition of active vita-
min D, or an increase in dialysate calcium to 3.0 or 3.5 mEq/L 
(1.5 or 1.75 mM). Other major side effects of cinacalcet are 
nausea and vomiting, which occur in up to 30% of patients, 
and rash.
A large outcomes trial of cinacalcet versus placebo 
achieved substantial PTH control (median PTH about 300 vs. 
700 pg/mL [32 vs. 74 pmol/L] at 6 months) and lower serum 
calcium levels (median calcium 9.1 vs. 9.9 mg/dL; 2.27 vs. 2.47 
mmol/L), but use of cinacalcet did not reduce cardiovascular 
events or deaths (EVOLVE Trial Investigators, 2012).
 VIII. MISCELLANEOUS THERAPIES
A. Bisphosphonates. While these agents can increase bone den-
sity in osteoporosis, they have not been adequately tested 
or shown to be efficacious in dialysis patients. Bisphospho-
nates decrease bone resorption by inhibiting osteoclasts. This 
reduction in bone turnover may be deleterious in dialysis 
patients, creating a form of adynamic bone disease. Generally, 
these agents should not be used in dialysis patients.
B. Teriparatide. A synthetic form of PTH(1-34), this polypeptide 
induces a marked increase in bone density in osteoporotic 
patients when administered as a daily subcutaneous injec-
tion. It has not been tested in dialysis patients, but may be 
of value in the treatment of adynamic bone disease, as PTH 
levels usually are low in this disorder. Further studies are 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   686 11/10/14   4:03 am
687Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
needed to define the role of teriparatide in low bone turnover 
disease, and teriparatide has not been FDA approved in this 
population.
IX. PARATHYROIDECTOMY . Despite aggressive efforts to control PTH
levels, surgical parathyroidectomy (PTX) continues to be nec-
essary in those patients with severe hyperparathyroidism. PTX
rates were higher among patients who were younger, female,
nondiabetic, receiving peritoneal dialysis, and those with a longer 
duration of dialysis (Foley, 2005).
A. Indications. Failure of high-dosage intravenous active vitamin D 
and calcimimetic therapy to improve findings of hyperpara-
thyroidism suggests the presence of large, poorly suppressible 
glands that require removal.
The indications for parathyroidectomy are listed in 
Table 36.5. When parathyroidectomy is being contemplated 
for the treatment of refractory osteitis fibrosa or hypercalce -
mia, very high PTH levels would be expected, and it is impor -
tant to document this (e.g., iPTH usually more than 1,000 pg 
per mL [106 pmol/L]) before contemplating surgery. A lower 
serum PTH level should be suppressible using calcitriol or 
an active vitamin D analog. Also, lower serum PTH levels or 
a normal value for bone-specific alkaline phosphatase should 
prompt one to question the necessity for parathyroidectomy. 
Bone biopsy should show marked osteitis fibrosa with many 
osteoclasts, increased tetracycline labeling, and minimal alu-
minum staining.
B. Relative contraindications. Recent studies have shown that accu-
mulation of aluminum on the bone mineralizing surface 
increases markedly after parathyroidectomy and suggest that 
parathyroidectomy should not be done in patients who are 
aluminum-loaded. If there is a history of long-term aluminum 
exposure, a bone biopsy should be performed prior to parathy-
roidectomy to exclude significant aluminum accumulation.
C. Surgical strategy. Parathyroid surgery is a complex endeavor and 
requires the services of a surgeon with experience in this pro-
cedure. Aberrantly located glands, and three, five, or even six 
1. Severe progressive symptomatic osteitis fibrosa (skeletal pain and/
or fractures) despite adequate medical management, including serum 
phosphorus control and calcitriol therapy
2.
 Very high levels of PTH plus any of the following:
•	 Persistent
	hypercalcemia	if	other	causes	have	been	excluded
•	 Severe 	intractable	pruritus
•	 Persistent 	severe	soft-tissue	calcification	despite	attempts	to	control	the	
serum phosphorus level
•	 Idiopathic 	disseminated	skin	necrosis	(calciphylaxis)
•	 Incapacitating 	arthritis,	periarthritis,	and	spontaneous	tendon	ruptures
Indications for Parathyroidectomy
36.5
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   687 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
688
rather than the usual four glands, may be present. An attempt 
may be made to localize the glands preoperatively using 
10-MHz ultrasonographic scanning or thallium–technetium 
scanning, but this is usually not necessary.
Until recently, the operation of choice had been subtotal 
parathyroidectomy: total resection of three glands and 75% 
of the fourth. The alternative approach has been total para-
thyroidectomy with autotransplantation of some parathyroid 
tissue into the forearm or, more recently, subcutaneously in 
the presternal area (Kinnaert, 2000). Both procedures entail 
some disadvantages, including the risks of permanent hypo-
parathyroidism and recurrence (or lack of resolution) of bone 
disease or hypercalcemia. Recurrence and failure to improve 
are troublesome problems; often, it is uncertain whether the 
cause is hyperfunction of residual or transplanted parathyroid 
tissue or the unsuspected presence of an additional gland fol-
lowing surgery.
D. Chemical ablation. Percutaneous injection of ethanol or calcitriol 
into the parathyroid glands of patients with severe secondary 
hyperparathyroidism has been used to cause regression of the 
glands and moderate parathyroid hormone secretion. It is 
performed using ultrasound or color Doppler flow mapping 
and may be considered in those who are poor surgical risks 
and in centers with the appropriate expertise (Kakuta, 1999). 
The risk of recurrent nerve palsy has been reported to be low.
E. Postoperative hypocalcemia.  Within several hours of parathy-
roidectomy, but especially during the first postoperative days, 
profound hypocalcemia can develop, the severity of which 
depends on the degree of osteitis fibrosa, which can be pre-
dicted by the extent of preoperative serum alkaline phospha-
tase elevation and bone histology. In addition to oral calcium 
supplements (2–4 g per day), large dosages of intravenous 
calcium (0.5–5.0 g per day) and oral or intravenous calcitriol 
(2–6 mcg per day) may be required to maintain serum calcium 
levels in an acceptable range (Dawborn, 1983). Some advocate 
starting calcitriol and oral calcium therapy a few days before 
the procedure even in hypercalcemic patients.
 X. CALCIFIC UREMIC ARTERIOLOP ATHY (CUA), previously known as “cal-
ciphylaxis, ” is an unusual disorder seen predominately in dialy-
sis patients. Early signs and symptoms include livedo reticularis 
and extremely painful red nodules, which progress to ulcerative 
and necrotic lesions. Risk factors include female gender, obe -
sity, and Caucasian race. Exposure to the uremic milieu may 
be responsible for altering vascular smooth muscle cells and 
increasing the expression of factors involved in ectopic mineral-
ization, such as osteopontin and core-binding factor alpha (Moe 
& Chen, 2003). Further mineralization from elevated calcium 
and phosphorus levels ultimately results in arteriolar calcifica-
tion, occlusion, and tissue ischemia. A high index of suspicion 
is necessary to identify the disease as early as possible. The 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   688 11/10/14   4:03 am
689Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
differential diagnosis includes vasculitis, coumadin-associated 
skin necrosis, cryoglobulinemia, calcinosis cutis, and panniculi-
tis. Bone scan has been reported to identify calcium deposition 
in 97% with early plaque-only CUA (Fine & Zacharias, 2002). 
Skin biopsy shows characteristic arteriolar calcifications in the 
medial layer.
Once the diagnosis is made, calcium-containing supple-
ments and vitamin D analogs should be discontinued, and 
non–calcium-based phosphorus-binders should be titrated 
for aggressive phosphorus control. Parathyroidectomy is rec-
ommended for those with CUA and elevated iPTH (> 500 pg/
mL (53 pmol/L)), though hyperparathyroidism is not required 
for CUA, and patients may in fact have low to normal iPTH 
levels (Bleyer, 1998). Coumadin, which inhibits the calcium-
regulatory matrix gla-protein, should be discontinued. Sodium 
thiosulfate, at a dose of 25 g IV three times per week, has been 
reported to completely resolve the lesions in 26% and improve 
the process in 47% (Nigwekar, 2013). The mechanism of action 
is unknown (O’Neill & Hardcastle, 2012). Pamidronate has 
also been cited in a single case report to effect  rapid clinical 
improvement (Monney, 2004). Wound care is critically impor -
tant in ulcerative lesions, and surgical debridement and anti -
biotics may be necessary. Hyperbaric oxygen (Basile, 2002) and 
low-dose tissue plasminogen activator  (Sewell & Pittelkow, 
2004) have been reported to promote wound healing in single 
case studies.
XI. ALUMINUM TO xICITY . Aluminum toxicity is rarely seen today
because of the development of non-aluminum phosphorus bind-
ers and improvement in water purity. Among those still exposed
to aluminum-based compounds, greater risk for accumulation
occurs in diabetics, the iron-deficient, children, and those with
exposure to citrate (which increases aluminum absorption). Alu-
minum bone disease results in diffuse bone pain or fractures with 
low iPTH, hypercalcemia, and normal alkaline phosphatase.
Confirmation of aluminum toxicity with the deferoxamine 
(DFO) test should be done in those with serum aluminum levels 
between 60 and 200 mcg/L (2,160 and 7,200 nmol/L), those with 
symptoms of aluminum toxicity, and prior to parathyroidectomy 
in those with known exposure. The combination of low iPTH and 
an increase in serum aluminum by 50 mcg/L (1,800 nmol/L) 2 
days after a 5-mg/kg DFO administration is predictive of alumi-
num bone disease. Definitive diagnosis is made with bone biopsy 
and trabecular staining for aluminum deposition.
In all cases of aluminum toxicity, exposure to aluminum 
must be identified and stopped. DFO can be administered on 
a weekly basis at a dose of 5 mg/kg for 2 months. To prevent 
 aluminum-related encephalopathy, those with aluminum levels 
greater than 200 mcg/L (7,200 nmol/L) should undergo intensive 
hemodialysis with high-flux membranes. Once levels are less 
than 200 mcg/L (7,200 nmol/L), DFO treatment can be started. 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   689 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
690
Side effects of DFO include ototoxicity, retinopathy, fatal Mucor  
infections, and precipitation of encephalopathy. For more details 
see the fourth edition of this Handbook (D’Haese and DeBroe, 
2007).
References and Suggested Readings
Armas LAG, et al. 25-hydroxyvitamin D response to cholecalciferol supplementation 
in hemodialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7:1428–1434.
Basile C, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for calcific uremic arteriolopathy: a case 
series. J Nephrol. 2002;16:676–680.
Bleyer AJ, et al. A case control study of proximal calciphylaxis. Am J Kidney Dis.  
1998;32:376–383.
Cannata-Andia JB, et al. Use of phosphate-binding agents is associated with a lower 
risk of mortality. Kidney Int. 2013;84:998–1008.
Cavalier E, et al. Interpretation of serum PTH concentrations with different kits in 
dialysis patients according to the KDIGO guidelines: importance of the reference 
(normal) values. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:1950–1956.
Chertow GM, et al. Sevelamer attenuates the progression of coronary and aortic calci-
fication in hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int. 2002;62:245–252.
Cicone JS, et al. Successful treatment of calciphylaxis with intravenous sodium thio-
sulfate. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004;43:1104–1108.
Clark OH, et al. Localization studies in patients with persistent or recurrent hyperpara-
thyroidism. Surgery. 1985;98:1083–1094.
Coen G, et al. PTH 1-84 and PTH “7-84” in the noninvasive diagnosis of renal bone 
disease. Am J Kidney Dis. 2002;40:348–354.
Cunningham J, Zehnder D. New Vitamin D analogs and changing therapeutic para -
digms. Kidney Int. 2011;79:702–707.
Daugirdas JT, et al; the Frequent Hemodialysis Network Trial Group. The  phosphate 
binder equivalent dose. Semin Dial. 2011;24:41–49.
Daugirdas JT, et al; the FHN Trial Group. Effects of frequent hemodialysis on  measures 
of CKD mineral and bone disorder. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;23:727–738.
Dawborn JK, et al. Parathyroidectomy in chronic renal failure. Nephron. 1983;33:100–
105.
D’Haese PC, DeBroe ME. Aluminum, lanthanum, and strontium. In: Daugirdas JT, Ing 
TS, Blake P , eds. Handbook of Dialysis, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 
2007:714–726.
de Francisco ALM, et al. Evaluation of calcium acetate/magnesium carbonate as a 
phosphate binder compared with sevelamer hydrochloride in haemodialysis 
patients: a RCT (CALMAG study) assessing efficacy and tolerability. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant. 2010;25:3707–3717.
Delmez JA, Slatopolsky E. Hyperphosphatemia: its consequences and treatment in 
patients with chronic renal disease. Am J Kidney Dis. 1992;19:303–317.
D’Haese PC, et al. A Multicenter study on the effects of lanthanum carbonate 
 (Fosrenol) and calcium carbonate on renal bone disease in dialysis patients. 
 Kidney Int. 2003;63:S73–S78.
D’Haese PC, et al. Use of low-dose deferrioxamine test to diagnose and differenti-
ate between patients with aluminum-related bone disease, increased risk for 
aluminum toxicity, or aluminum overload. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1995;10:  
1874–1884.
Duranton F, et al. Vitamin D treatment and mortality in chronic kidney disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Nephrol. 2013;37:239–248.
EVOLVE Trial Investigators, et al. Effect of cinacalcet on cardiovascular disease in 
patients undergoing dialysis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2482-2494.
Fine A, Zacharias J. Calciphylaxis is usually non-ulcerating: risk factors, outcome and 
therapy. Kidney Int. 2002;61:2210–2217.
Floege J. When man turns to stone: extraosseous calcification in uremic patients. Kid-
ney Int. 2004;65:2447–2462.
Floege J, et al. A phase III study of the efficacy and safety of a novel iron-based phos-
phate binder in dialysis patients. Kidney Int. 2014;86:638–647.
Foley RN, et al. The fall and rise of parathyroidectomy in U.S. hemodialysis patients, 
1992 to 2002. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:210–218.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   690 11/10/14   4:03 am
691Chapter 36 / Bone Disease
Gallieni M, et al; Italian Group for the Study of Intravenous Calcitriol. Low-dose intra-
venous calcitriol treatment of secondary hyperparathyroidism in hemodialysis 
patients. Kidney Int. 1992;42:1191–1198.
Gauci C, et al. and the NephroTest Study Group. Pitfalls of measuring total blood cal-
cium in patients with CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;19:1592–1598.
Goldsmith D, Ritz E, Covic A. Vascular calcification: a stiff challenge for the nephrolo-
gists. Kidney Int. 2004;66:1315–1333.
Goodman WG, et al. A calcimimetic agent lowers plasma parathyroid hormone 
levels in patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism. Kidney Int. 2000;58:  
436–445.
Gutekunst L. Restricting protein and phosphorus: a dietitian’s perspective. In: Daugir-
das JT. Handbook of Chronic Kidney Disease. Philadelphia, PA; Wolters Kluwer; 
2011:127–140.
Hutchison AJ, et al. Efficacy, tolerability, and safety of lanthanum carbonate in hyper-
phosphatemia: a 6-month, randomized, comparative trial versus calcium carbon-
ate. Nephron Clin Pract. 2005;100:c8–c19.
Hutchison AJ. Lanthanum carbonate treatment, for up to 6 years, is not associated 
with adverse effects on the liver in patients with chronic kidney disease stage 5 
receiving hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol. 2009;71:286–295.
Jen G, et al. Prevention of secondary hyperparathyroidism in hemodialysis patients: 
the key role of native vitamin D supplementation. Hemodial Int. 2010;14:486–491.
Kakuta T, et al. Prognosis of parathyroid function after successful percutaneous etha-
nol injection therapy guided by color Doppler flow mapping in chronic  dialysis 
patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;33:1091–1099.
Kinnaert P , et al. Long-term results of subcutaneous parathyroid grafts in uremic 
patients. Arch Surg. 2000;135:186–190.
Lewis JB, et al. Ferric citrate controls phosphorus and delivers iron in dialysis patients. 
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014; in press.
Lomashvili KA, et al. Phosphate-induced vascular calcification: role of pyrophosphate 
and osteopontin. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004;15:1392–1401.
London GM, et al. Arterial calcification and bone hisomorphometry in end-stage renal 
disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004;15:1943–1951.
Lopes AA, et al. Phosphate binder use and mortality among hemodialysis patients 
in the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS): evaluation of 
 possible confounding by nutritional status. Am J Kidney Dis. 2012;60:90–101.
Lopez-Hilker S, et al. Phosphorus restriction reverses hyperparathyroidism in uremia 
independent of changes in calcium and calcitriol. Am J Physiol. 1990;259:F432–F437.
Moe SM, Chen NX. Calciphylaxis and vascular calcification: a continuum of 
 extra-skeletal osteogenesis. Pediat Nephrol. 2003;18:969–975.
Moe SM, et al. Vegetarian compared with meat dietary protein source and phospho-
rus homeostasis in chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:257–264.
Monney P , et al. Rapid improvement of calciphylaxis after intravenous pamidro-
nate therapy in a patient with chronic renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant.  
2004;19:2130–2132.
Mudge DW , et al. Does aluminium continue to have a role as a phosphate binder in 
contemporary practice? BMC Nephrol. 2011;12:20.
Nastou D, et al. Next-generation phosphate binders: focus on iron-based binders. 
Drugs. 2014;74:863–877.
Navarro JF, et al. Relationship between serum magnesium and parathyroid  hormone 
levels in hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;34:43–48.
Nigwekar SU, et al. Sodium thiosulfate therapy for calcific uremic arteriolopathy. Clin 
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;8:1162–1170.
O’Neill WC, Hardcastle KI. The chemistry of thiosulfate and vascular calcification. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:521–526.
Penne EL, et al; for the CONTRAST investigators. Short-term effects of online hemodi-
afiltration on phosphate control: a result from the randomized Controlled Convec-
tive Transport Study. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;55:77–87.
Penne EL, et al. Role of residual renal function in phosphate control and anemia 
management in chronic hemodialysis patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:  
281–289.
Rastogi A. Sevelamer revisited: pleiotropic effects on endothelial and cardiovascular 
risk factors in chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease. Ther Adv Car -
diovasc Dis. 2013;7:322–342.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   691 11/10/14   4:03 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
692
Schaefer K, et al. Reduced risk of hypercalcemia for hemodialysis patients by adminis-
tering calcitriol at night. Am J Kidney Dis. 1992;19:460–464.
Schiller LR, et al. Effect of the time of administration of calcium acetate on  phosphorus 
binding. N Engl J Med. 1989;320:1110–1113.
Sewell LD, Pittelkow MR. Low-dose tissue plasminogen activator for calciphylaxis. 
Arch Dermatol. 2004;140:1045–1048.
Souberbielle JC, et al. Inter-method variability in PTH measurement: implication for 
the care of CKD patients. Kidney Int. 2006;70:345–350.
Spiegel DM, Farmer B. Long-term effects of magnesium carbonate on coronary artery 
calcification and bone mineral density in hemodialysis patients: a pilot study. 
Hemodial Int. 2009;13:453–459.
Teng M, et al. Survival of patients undergoing hemodialysis with paricalcitol or cal-
citriol therapy. New Engl J Med. 2003;349:446–456.
Ubara Y, et al. Histomorphogenic features of bone in patients with primary and sec-
ondary hypoparathyroidism. Kidney Int. 2003;63:1809–1816.
Wüthrich RP , et al. Randomized clinical trial of the iron-based phosphate binder PA21 
in hemodialysis patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;8:280–289.
Yokoyama K, et al. A randomized trial of JTT-751 versus sevelamer hydrochloride in 
patients on hemodialysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014a;29:1053–1060.
Yokoyama K, et al. Ferric citrate hydrate for the treatment of hyperphosphatemia in 
nondialysis-dependent CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014b;9:543-552.
Web References
Uremic bone disease links. http://www.hdcn.com/crf/bone and http://kdigo.org/
home/mineral-bone-disorder/.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch036.indd   692 11/10/14   4:03 am