693
Dialysis in Infants 
and Children
Susan R. Mendley37
Choices in dialysis treatment for infants and children are wide and 
include the full range of therapies utilized in adult patients. Theoreti-
cal considerations of clearance, kinetic modeling, and adequacy of 
dialysis are equally relevant in pediatric dialysis, although they are 
less well studied in this population than in adults. There are impor -
tant technical considerations in performing dialysis on patients 
whose weights may vary by as much as 50-fold. Furthermore, there are 
indications for and complications of the dialysis procedure that are 
unique to children. Finally, chronic care of children receiving 
 dialysis 
is complex and requires attention to growth and cognitive develop -
ment, age-appropriate nutritional interventions, consequences of 
metabolic disturbances, and psychosocial adjustment to achieve the 
goal of complete rehabilitation.
 I. ACUTE DIALYSIS
A. Indications. The indications for acute renal replacement  therapy 
in an infant, child, or adolescent are similar to those in adults 
and include:
1. Oliguric acute renal failure where optimal nutritional
and medical support will require fluid and/or electrolyte
removal
2. Volume overload with congestive heart failure, pulmo-
nary edema, or severe hypertension not manageable with
diuretics or conservative measures; fluid overload greater
than 20% of body weight in the setting of critical illness may 
be an independent indication
3. Hyperkalemia with electrocardiographic abnormalities
4. Metabolic acidosis that cannot be safely corrected with
sodium bicarbonate administration because of risk of
sodium or volume overload
5. Symptoms of uremic encephalopathy, with particular
attention to seizures
6. Uremic pericarditis
7. Tumor lysis syndrome or severe hyperuricemia compli -
cating chemotherapy for malignancy
8. Progressively rising blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level in a
situation where imminent recovery is not anticipated andDaugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   693 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
694
uremic consequences are likely. The BUN level where con -
cern arises will vary with the age of the child; 35–50 mg/
dL (12–18 mmol/L) is potentially dangerous in an infant, 
whereas 150 mg/dL (54 mmol/L) in an adolescent may 
necessitate initiation of dialysis.
9. Inborn error of metabolism with severe organic acidemia 
or hyperammonemia
10. Toxic ingestion. Guidelines for extracorporeal therapy for 
poisoning are found in Chapter 20.
B. Choice of acute dialysis modality
1. Acute peritoneal dialysis  is often used in infants and young 
 children and has several advantages. It does not require 
sophisticated equipment or technical expertise. One can 
avoid the need for vascular access, blood priming, and anti-
coagulation; hemodynamic instability is uncommon. Con -
tinuous peritoneal dialysis (PD) provides efficient clearance 
in small children. It is frequently used as adjunctive therapy 
to manage fluid overload in infants after cardiac surgery 
with cardiopulmonary bypass. However, severe hyperam-
monemia, hyperphosphatemia, or hyperkalemia often 
require more rapid correction; in such situations, hemodial-
ysis (sometimes in combination with continuous hemo[dia]
filtration) may be more appropriate. Furthermore, volume 
removal by ultrafiltration in PD is often unpredictable and 
may not be rapid enough in some patients with congestive 
heart failure or pulmonary edema. Dialysate leakage with 
risk of peritonitis may limit acute PD.
There are no guidelines as to what constitutes 
 adequate PD in acute renal failure (ARF), and one attempts 
maximum possible clearance to compensate for catabolic 
stress, utilizing continuous exchanges. The initial pre-
scription may include hourly exchanges; more frequent 
exchanges can be performed, although a greater fraction 
of total time is then spent in filling and draining, rather 
than in solute exchange. An automated cycler facilitates 
this process, limiting nursing effort and repeated opening 
of the catheter. Most cyclers can deliver exchange  volumes 
small enough for infants and young children. When a 
cycler is unavailable or when fill volumes < 150 mL are 
desirable, a safe alternative is the Dialy-Nate set (Utah 
Medical Products, Gesco), which allows one to connect 
a bag of dialysate to a closed circuit, including a buretrol 
device (in-line sterile graduated cylinder) connected to the 
patient's PD catheter, and a drainage line for effluent dialy-
sate attached to a measurement device. The desired vol-
ume fills the buretrol and is then infused into the patient; 
after a defined dwell, the effluent dialysate is drained and 
measured, and the process is repeated without opening 
the system. This allows one to perform closed circuit, low-
volume, manual continuous PD in infants and very small 
children.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   694 09/10/14   1:44 am
695Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
Exchange volumes may be targeted at 30–50 mL/kg in 
infants and up to 1,100 mL/m2 in children, but immediately 
after catheter placement, it is prudent to limit volumes to 
half or less of this volume to avoid leakage, which predis-
poses to peritonitis. Hourly exchanges may result in obli-
gate ultrafiltration even when 1.5% dextrose concentration 
is used, so that parenteral or enteral fluid intake is needed 
to avoid volume depletion and prolongation of ARF.
2. Acute hemodialysis  is performed when rapid solute clear -
ance is of paramount importance or PD is contraindicated 
because of an intra-abdominal process (including recent 
abdominal surgery, diaphragmatic hernia, omphalocele, or 
gastroschisis) or respiratory limitation.
Acute hemodialysis in infants and small children 
requires experience and technical expertise, as well as size-
appropriate dialyzers, blood lines, and vascular catheters. 
Very small patients may require blood or albumin priming 
of the hemodialysis circuit. Small patient size allows effi-
cient and rapid solute clearance where appropriate (i.e., 
ammonia), but must be approached with caution where 
overly rapid osmolar shifts could precipitate seizures 
(reportedly more common in children than in adults). Dia-
lyzers are available in a range of sizes for children through 
older adolescents (Table 37.1); however, the choices in 
small dialyzers have become fewer, and availability is often 
limited.
3. Continuous therapies. Continuous renal replacement therapy 
(CRRT) has been utilized in pediatric patients, ranging 
from preterm infants to older adolescents. The physiologic 
principles are unchanged from those in adults (see  Chapter 
15); because of small patient size, clearance can be 
extremely efficient, replacing a large fraction of endog-
enous renal function. Prospective registry data on CRRT in 
infants and children are becoming available and providing 
insights into practice variation and determinants of out -
come  (Ashkenazi, 2013). We recognize fluid overload as an 
independent risk factor for mortality in children with acute 
kidney injury (AKI) receiving CRRT and adjust ultrafiltra-
tion to address that. CRRT has been successfully combined 
with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support even 
in infants and provides better volume management than 
free-flow systems. Further, continuous therapies permit 
better phosphorus clearance than intermittent hemodi -
alysis or PD and are thus frequently employed in the tumor 
lysis syndrome in children with Burkitt lymphoma or acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia.
Maintaining vascular access with adequate flow in 
small vessels can be problematic (Table 37.2) and is often 
the limiting factor. There are older reports of arteriove-
nous hemofiltration (CAVH), but most centers have found 
pump-driven venovenous treatments to perform more 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   695 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
696
Characteristics of Low-volume Dialyzers Suitable for Pediatric Use
Dialyzer
Priming  
Volume (mL)
Surface 
Area (m2)
Urea Clearance (QB 200 or  
as Specified)
B12 Clearance 
(at Highest 
Tested QB) K0A Membrane Manufacturer
Polyflux 6H 52 0.6 50 QB = 5097 
QB = 100136 
QB = 150167 
QB = 200
90 465 QB = 200 Polyflux 
(polyarylethersulfone, 
polyvinylpyrrolidone, 
polyamide)
Gambro
CA50, CA70 35, 45 0.5, 0.7 128 (147 
QB = 300), 153 (175 
QB = 300)
27, 36 243, 333 Cellulose acetate Baxter
F3, F4, F5 28, 42, 63 0.4, 0.7, 1.0 125, 155 (183 
QB = 300), 170 (206 
QB = 300)
20, 34, 47 231, 364, 472 Polysulfone Fresenius
Filtryzer 
B3-0.8A
49 0.8 163 61 404 PMMA Toray
PMMA, polymethylmethacrylate.
37.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   696 09/10/14   1:44 am
697Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
reliably and to maintain circuit patency longer. As in acute 
hemodialysis, the entire circuit volume must be consid-
ered and a blood or albumin prime used if the circuit vol-
ume is >10% of the patient's estimated blood volume. The 
electrolyte concentrations and pH of the blood prime are 
far from normal values, and many infants will experience 
hemodynamic instability at initiation of therapy. Zero bal -
ance ultrafiltration has been proposed to bring the electro-
lyte concentrations in the blood prime close to physiologic 
values, which might avoid instability at initiation (Hack -
barth, 2005). Cooling of the blood circuit is a concern in 
infants; a blood warmer may be used in-line, although with 
some models this increases the circuit volume. Hemofilters 
appropriate for pediatric use are listed in Table 37.3. Ultra-
filtration is controlled by volumetric pump or automated 
weighing to avoid errors in replacement fluid, which, if 
compounded over days of therapy, could be dramatic in a 
small, anuric patient.
Currently available machines, including the Gam-
bro Prismaflex (Gambro Lundia AB, Lund, Sweden), the 
Braun Diapact (B. Braun Medical, Bethlehem, PA), and 
the NxStage (NxStage Medical Inc., Lawrence, MA), have 
been used in children, although the NxStage does not 
permit blood flow rates in a range appropriate for small 
patients. Several studies have demonstrated the success 
of CRRT in critically ill infants and children. Ultrafiltra -
tion rates in infants and small children may be as low as 
5–30 mL/hr without replacement fluid (slow continuous 
ultrafiltration, SCUF) or as high as 100–600 mL/hr with 
replacement fluid (C-HF); larger children can tolerate 
ultrafiltration and replacement rates near those of adults. 
Commercially available bicarbonate-based dialysate or 
replacement solution (PrismaSol, PrismaSATE, [Gambro 
Lundia AB, Lund, Sweden], Accusol, [Baxter Healthcare, 
Patient Size Catheter Size Access Location
Neonate UVC—5.0 F Umbilicus
UAC—3.5, 5.0 F Umbilicus
or 5.0 F single lumen Femoral vein(s)
or 6.5, 7.0 F dual lumen Femoral vein(s)
3–15 kg 6.5, 7.0 F dual lumen Femoral/subclavian vein
16–30 kg 7.0, 9.0 F dual lumen Femoral/internal jugular/subclavian
>30 kg 9.0, 11.5 F dual lumen Femoral/internal jugular/subclavian
UVC, umbilical vein catheter; UAC, umbilical artery catheter; F, French gauge.
Catheters for Use in Pediatric Extracorporeal Renal 
 Replacement Therapy37.2
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   697 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
698
Deerfield, IL], Pureflow (NxStage Medical, Inc., Lawrence, 
MA), Normocarb (Dialysis Solutions Inc., Whitby, ON), or 
Hemosol BO [Gambro Lundia AB, Lund, Sweden), is the 
safest choice; errors in local preparation of solutions in 
hospital pharmacies are well recognized and are no longer 
appropriate now that standardized solutions are available. 
Successful circuit anticoagulation has been reported with 
both heparin and citrate. Since the citrate infusion rate 
is scaled to circuit blood flow, which is relatively large in 
infants and small children, citrate accumulation may occur 
after prolonged therapy, resulting in “citrate lock” or persis-
tently low ionized calcium levels despite calcium infusion. 
The combination of fixed concentration bicarbonate-
 
containing replacement fluid and citrate anticoagu  lation 
may result in metabolic alkalosis after several days of 
therapy. In reported series, infants <5 kg are more often 
anticoa
 gulated with heparin. Doses for systemic heparin 
anticoagulation in infants are larger than those reported 
for adults, and monitoring the system by activated clotting 
times (ACTs) is recommended. Circuit life is significantly 
shorter in pediatric patients run without anticoagulation.
II. CHRONIC DIALYSIS
A. Indications. Optimal management of chronic kidney disease
(CKD) avoids some of the historical indications for initiation of 
dialysis. Anemia, acidosis, hyperparathyroidism, and growth 
delay can often be managed medically, so nephrologists must 
be attuned to subtle indications of uremia, that is, diminished 
energy (less vigorous play), resumption of napping, anorexia 
(with absence of expected weight gain), and inattentiveness at 
school or failure to attain expected developmental milestones, 
in order to recognize the appropriate time to begin dialysis. 
Hemofilter
Priming 
 Volume 
(mL)
Surface 
Area (m
2)
Ultrafiltration 
Rate (mL/min, 
Q
B = 100) Membrane Manufacturer
Minifilter 
Plus
15 0.07 1–8 Polysulfone Baxter
RenafloII HF 
400, 700
28, 53 0.3, 0.7 20–35, 35–45 Polysulfone Minntech
Prismaflex, 
M60, M100 
set
93, 152 0.6, 0.9 38,44 AN69 Gambro
Prismaflex 
HF20
60 0.2 PAES Gambro
AN69, acrylonitrile and sodium methallyl sulfonate; PAES, polyarylethersulfone.
Hemofilters and Sets Appropriate for Pediatric Use
37.3
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   698 09/10/14   1:44 am
699Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
There is no consensus as to the specific level of GFR at which 
dialysis should be started. Symptomatic uremia or metabolic 
disturbances such as hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, mal-
nutrition, or growth failure that cannot be managed conser -
vatively are agreed upon as indications for initiation of renal 
replacement therapy. Chronic dialysis is usually an interim 
measure to allow time to prepare for kidney transplantation.
B. Choice of chronic dialysis modality
1. Chronic PD is often the therapy of choice for pediatric 
patients. Transperitoneal solute exchange in children 
appears to be as efficient as in adults. Since peritoneal 
surface area is correlated with body surface area, small 
children have a relatively large surface for solute exchange 
compared with adults, which makes PD an effective modal-
ity. Peritoneal equilibration testing (PET) shows that very 
young children are more likely to fall in the category of 
high or high-average transport, although this observation 
appears to be the result of large surface area for transport 
rather than a difference in peritoneal membrane charac -
teristics and can be corrected for by testing patients at fill 
volumes of 1,000–1,100 mL/m 2. Adolescents and teenag-
ers have PET results more typical of adults. Enhanced glu-
cose absorption will result in relatively rapid attainment 
of osmotic equilibrium between dialysate and plasma, 
limiting ultrafiltration on long dwells. Automated forms of 
PD utilizing short dwells are most commonly used in chil-
dren to accommodate high average peritoneal transport 
in young children and to improve treatment adherence in 
older children.
PD offers additional benefits as a chronic dialysis 
modality. It is technically simple and avoids the need for 
chronic vascular access (which is particularly difficult in 
infants and small children). Blood pressure and volume 
status may be better controlled with PD than with hemodi-
alysis. Less time is spent in the hospital and in the dialysis 
unit, with more time spent at school and engaged in other 
 age-appropriate activities. Parents often feel they have 
greater control over their child's care when they perform PD.
a. Limitations to peritoneal dialysis.  Previous abdominal sur -
gery may result in intra-abdominal adhesions that make 
PD impossible, particularly repair of complex urogenital 
anomalies, which are often a cause of end-stage kidney  
disease (ESKD) in children. However, one can rarely pre-
dict whether adhesions will limit therapy, and a trial of 
PD is usually warranted. The presence of a ventriculo-
peritoneal shunt was once considered a relative contra -
indication to PD; however, multicenter data show that 
dialysis can be performed successfully without ascend-
ing infection even in the setting of peritonitis (Dolan, 
2013). The presence of a ureterostomy, pyelostomy, or 
loop ileostomy is not an absolute contraindication to 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   699 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
700
performance of PD, although the risk of exit site infec-
tion and peritonitis with urinary organisms is increased.
b. Transplantation in peritoneal dialysis patients. PD is continued 
up to the time of renal transplantation without increased 
risk of infection. The PD catheter is often removed at the 
time of living-donor transplantation (assuming immedi-
ate graft function), but sometimes it is left in place if a
deceased donor transplant is performed. The catheter
will then be removed electively once graft function is sta-
ble; delay in catheter removal has been associated with
posttransplantation peritonitis in the dry abdomen.
c. Complications of peritoneal dialysis.  The complications of
pediatric PD include those already described in adults
(see Chapters 28–29). PD presents particular problems
for children and families. Months or years of a demand -
ing regimen may result in “burnout” or caregiver fatigue, 
which exacerbates underlying family conflicts; non -
adherence to therapy becomes common, particularly
among adolescents. The presence of a PD catheter may
adversely affect body image. Children have a higher rate
of peritonitis than adults, which further complicates
therapy. Eradication of nasal Staphylococcus aureus  car-
riage leads to decreased exit site infection and peritonitis 
in adults, but studies in children have shown no benefit.
Congenital defects in the diaphragm may result in com-
munication between the pleural and peritoneal spaces.
In some cases, a change to automated peritoneal dialysis 
(APD) with empty periods may permit continuation of
PD. Some children become obese from excessive glucose 
absorption from dialysate; this presents additional prob-
lems for body image as well as adversely affecting blood
lipid levels and an already increased risk of cardiovascu-
lar disease. Chronic hypoalbuminemia develops in some 
patients, particularly with repeated peritonitis; its long-
term consequences for growth in stature and lean body
mass are unknown.
C. Apparatus for acute and chronic peritoneal dialysis
1. Lactate-based PD solutions are available in a range of bag
sizes appropriate for small patients who perform chronic
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis and automated (cycler)
PD. Calcium concentrations of 1.25 mM and 1.75 mM are
used, depending on the desired calcium balance and type
and amount of phosphorus binder being used. Standard
dextrose concentrations (1.5%, 2.5%, and 4.25%) are uti-
lized, depending on the need for ultrafiltration. Enhanced
glucose absorption in small children occasionally warrants 
higher glucose concentration to maintain ultrafiltration,
although short-dwell dialysis is usually preferred in that
situation. Amino acid–containing PD solution is tolerated
in children, although there remains a greater reliance on
supplemental tube feeding in infants and young children.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   700 09/10/14   1:44 am
701Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
Icodextrin-containing solutions have been used in children 
for long dwells to limit peritoneal glucose exposure. Neutral 
pH solutions of pure bicarbonate or a bicarbonate/lactate 
combination have been shown to be safe in children and 
offer the potential benefit of protection of peritoneal mem-
brane integrity. The long-term impact of new solutions on 
acid–base and nutritional status is still unclear, and their 
role in chronic care of pediatric PD patients is still to be 
determined.
2. PD catheters are available in neonatal and pediatric sizes
of almost any configuration used in adults, including
Tenckhoff (curled and straight), swan-neck, and Toronto-
Western, usually with a choice of one or two cuffs. Most
commonly placed in children is a curled Tenckhoff cath -
eter with a straight tunnel; North American Pediatric Renal 
Trials and Collaborative Studies data suggest a benefit to
double-cuffed catheters and downward-oriented exit sites
in decreasing peritonitis rates.
a. Implantation. Chronic catheters are almost invariably
implanted surgically in pediatric patients under general
anesthesia. Laparoscopic placement is preferred if sur -
gical experience is available. Laparoscopic technique
allows the surgeon to see that the catheter is placed
in an optimal position, and it minimizes incision size
and healing time. Several technical points appear to be
important:
1.
Sealing the peritoneum around the catheter (to pre-
vent leakage) by use of a pursestring suture, which is
also affixed to the cuff. The exit site should be directed 
caudally, as shown in Figure 37.1, to facilitate drainage 
and to minimize the risk of exit site infection.
2.
Use of a second pursestring suture to seal the poste-
rior rectus sheath opening and fix the posterior rectus 
sheath to the upper part of the cuff (to prevent leakage 
and displacement; this is not shown in Fig. 37.1).
3.
Performance of a partial omentectomy (to prevent
obstruction)
4.
Intraoperative search for and closure of associated
hernial defects, especially a patent tunica vaginalis.
5.
Intraoperative testing of the catheter to verify that
there is free inflow and outflow of dialysate.
We try to allow 2 weeks for healing of the abdomen 
before using the catheter. It can be used immediately for 
acute PD or unanticipated clinical deterioration in CKD  
but one risks early leakage. Small exchange volumes and 
performance of APD in the supine position may help 
avoid dialysate leakage.
b. Acute “temporary” catheters can be placed after prefill -
ing the abdomen with dialysate as in adults (see Chapter 
23 for description of the technique in adults). Older acute 
PD catheters were much stiffer than chronic catheters,
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   701 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
702
conferring a greater risk of bowel injury. Newer, more 
flexible acute PD catheters have been developed, and 
some have reported success with their use with a low 
leakage and infection rate. However, most centers uti -
lize a surgically implanted chronic PD catheter for acute 
peritoneal dialysis, placing it at bedside in the intensive 
care unit in the most unstable patients.
3. APD cyclers have facilitated PD in young patients, and all 
available cyclers permit sufficiently small exchange vol -
umes to be used even in infants. Pediatric cycler tubing is 
available for some models of cyclers; it helps reduce dialy-
sis inefficiency due to dead space in the tubing, which is 
an important consideration with very small dwell volumes 
(<200 mL).
D. Chronic peritoneal dialysis prescription
1. Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD).  The technique 
for performing CAPD in the pediatric patient is similar 
to that in adults. Fill volumes are determined by patient 
comfort, but most children can tolerate 40–50 mL/kg or 
800–1,100 mL/m2 without discomfort or leakage once their 
catheter exit site is well healed, although this may require 
assessment of intraperitoneal pressure. The choice of glu-
cose concentration depends on ultrafiltration needs ( fluid 
intake minus urine output and insensible losses).
FIGURE 37.1 One method of implanting a peritoneal catheter in children. The pursestring 
suture used to seal the peritoneum includes the catheter cuff. A second pursestring 
suture (not shown) may also be used as described in the text to seal the posterior rectus 
sheath.  (Modified from Alexander SR, et al. Clinical parameters in continuous ambula-
tory peritoneal dialysis for infants and children. In: Moncrief JW, Popovich RP , eds. CAPD 
update. New York, NY: Masson, 1981.)
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   702 09/10/14   1:44 am
703Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
a. Kinetic modeling of CAPD as Kt/V-urea and creatinine 
clearance has been performed in children; however, out-
come data to define adequate clearance are not avail-
able. The NKF KDOQI (2006 update) recommendation 
for adequate CAPD in children is a weekly Kt/V-urea of 
1.8 per week; if residual renal function contributes to this 
clearance, it should be measured regularly. Collections 
of effluent dialysate and residual urine output (in con-
tinent patients with normal bladder function) are used 
to ensure that target clearance values are being achieved 
and that loss of kidney function is not compromising the 
adequacy of therapy. Patients unable to perform urine 
collections should be assumed to have no residual GFR 
to avoid inadvertent underdialysis. Many patients can 
achieve acceptable clearance and ultrafiltration with 
four exchanges per day; some will require more. The 
risk of noncompliance with the dialysis prescription 
and missing exchanges increases as the task of dialysis 
becomes more burdensome and intrudes on usual fam-
ily activities.
2. APD is well suited for chronic PD in children, accommo -
dating their efficient solute exchange and higher risk of 
 peritonitis. APD can be performed without a daytime dwell 
(nightly intermittent peritoneal dialysis, NIPD), with a day-
time dwell (continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis, CCPD), 
or with a daytime dwell and midday exchange if solute 
clearance or fluid removal necessitate. The daytime dwell 
is recommended to improve middle molecule clearance in 
those patients without residual renal function. NIPD may 
allow improved nutritional intake and decrease the risk of 
hernia formation, but clearance will likely be adequate only 
in patients with high or high-average transport as mea-
sured by PET or those with residual renal function. The day 
dwell of CCPD may allow one to shorten nightly treatments 
(desirable in older children) or improve clearance for low 
and low-average transporters; yet high transporters usually 
absorb most of their long dwell if it is left in all day. The 
initial prescription is guided by transport characteristics 
determined by PET, typically ranging from four to eight 
exchanges per night with dwell times of 45 minutes to 2 
hours.
a. Kinetic modeling.  Although kinetic modeling of PD deliv-
ery has been performed in children treated by CCPD and 
NIPD, outcome data to define adequate clearance are not 
available. Target clearance (peritoneal and renal) is the 
same as for CAPD, a weekly Kt/V-urea of 1.8. Dialysate 
and urine collections are performed to assess the actual 
delivered dialysis dose at a given prescription. Collections 
are repeated whenever the prescription is changed and 
at regular intervals to assess changes in residual renal 
function and peritoneal transport function. In practice, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   703 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
704
young children with PET-defined high or high-average 
permeability peritoneal membranes can almost always 
exceed these values, particularly if there is residual renal 
function. Older children with low-average permeability 
peritoneal membranes and without residual renal func -
tion often require a midday exchange to achieve accept -
able clearances.
3. T idal dialysis  is used in children; it can enhance clearance in 
patients with borderline values for Kt/V who might other -
wise need to change modalities. Children with abdominal 
pain at the end of a drain may be more comfortable using 
tidal dialysis with less frequent complete drains. Tidal ther-
apy is unwise in infants because of the risk of overfilling of 
the abdomen with respiratory compromise when the child 
cannot alert caregivers to distress.
E. Chronic hemodialysis.  Chronic hemodialysis is the appropri-
ate modality for children and families not capable of provid -
ing reliable home care. Furthermore, large adolescents with 
low-permeability peritoneal membranes may not achieve 
adequate clearance on PD without a burdensome exchange 
schedule, and such adolescents are appropriate candidates for 
hemodialysis. Because hemodialysis treatments take children 
out of usual activities (school and play), a hemodialysis unit 
must provide intensive nursing, tutoring, and play therapy 
during dialysis treatments.
1. Hemodialysis equipment
a. Vascular access. Vascular access remains a major limita-
tion to successful hemodialysis in small children. Placing 
and maintaining permanent accesses in small vessels 
requires experienced and dedicated surgeons and radi -
ologists. Vascular catheters can be placed by interven-
tional radiologists or surgeons depending on the best 
experience available in an institution. A conservative 
strategy for permanent access is critical because of the 
lifelong need for renal replacement therapy. Some young 
adults leave pediatric dialysis units after many years of 
hemodialysis treatments (with interval failed renal trans-
plants), and one must ensure they have not depleted all 
options for long-term vascular access.
1. Catheters (Table 37.2). Available double-lumen hemo-
dialysis catheters range from 7 F to 14 F in lengths 
appropriate for small children through older adoles-
cents. Both temporary and permanent catheters are 
available, and precurved models for internal jugular 
cannulation are available in larger sizes. The catheter 
tip should be radiologically positioned in the junction 
of the superior vena cava and right atrium.
In small infants and neonates, single-lumen cath-
eters may be more appropriate considering vessel size. 
In neonates, a catheter can be inserted into the vena 
cava through the umbilical vessel if the vessel is still 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   704 09/10/14   1:44 am
705Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
patent. Most of these catheters can be left in place for 
several weeks.
2. Fistulas and grafts.  In older children, creation of an 
arteriovenous fistula between the radial artery and 
cephalic vein in the nondominant arm with an end-
to-side anastomosis is a common mode of vascular 
access. When blood vessel size is too small for con-
structing an adequate fistula, a polytetrafluoroethyl-
ene (GoreTex or Impra) graft can be placed between an 
extremity artery and vein. Children with myelomenin-
gocele may prefer a graft placed in the thigh because 
of absent sensation if the vasculature is sufficiently 
developed to support that. Lower extremity grafts 
allow unimpeded play or schoolwork during dialysis 
treatments, but risk leg edema and hypertrophy.
3. Blood flows. Desired blood flow rate is targeted to urea 
clearance specifications for a chosen dialyzer. In a 
patient with advanced uremia, an initial urea clearance 
of 3 mL/min per kg is prudent to avoid symptomatic 
disequilibrium; higher urea removal rates are usually 
tolerated after the first few treatments. Smaller blood 
vessels cause higher venous resistance than in adults, 
which eventually limits flow, typically in the range of 
50–150 mL/min in small children and 200–350 mL/
min in older children. Small catheters often limit flow 
to 25–100 mL/min because of limited arterial inflow.
b. Dialyzers. A limited listing of dialyzers that may be appro-
priate for small patients is provided (Table 37.1).
c. Blood lines. Appropriately sized blood lines allow control 
of circuit volume. If the volume of the entire extracor -
poreal circuit exceeds 10% of the patient's blood  volume 
(>8 mL/kg), a warmed blood (or albumin) prime is 
 usually given to ensure hemodynamic stability. Small 
volume blood lines have become more difficult to find 
in an era of integrated hemodialysis machines. If small 
volume lines are chosen, it is important that the blood 
pump be properly calibrated for the chosen lines. Neona-
tal lines are not compatible with most currently available 
volumetric dialysis machines.
d. Dialysis solution.  Bicarbonate dialysis solution is stan -
dard for pediatric hemodialysis; it provides better 
hemodynamic stability and fewer intradialytic symp -
toms. Patients with small muscle mass will be unable to 
metabolize a large acetate load quickly.
e. Dialysis machines.  Dialysis machines that provide 
 volumetric ultrafiltration control are required. Small 
errors in ultrafiltration volume (of a few hundred milli -
liters) may cause symptomatic hypotension or chronic 
volume overload. Blood flows must be accurate within 
the range of 30–300 mL/min, and the blood pump 
 calibrated to different size lines.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   705 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
706
2. Hemodialysis prescription.  Small patients require a cautious 
approach to avoid disequilibrium by targeting urea clear -
ance of 3 mL/min per kg, which is calculated from the 
specifications of the chosen dialyzer and the blood flow 
attainable through the patient's access. Early treatments 
may be programmed even more slowly if the patient is 
very uremic; repeated short treatments are usually advis -
able during initiation of hemodialysis when the BUN 
is extremely elevated. Once a stable, chronic dialysis 
 prescription is attained, more efficient urea clearance is 
usually well tolerated, and fluid removal is more often 
a cause of intradialytic symptoms. With conditioning 
and distraction, most children can tolerate hemodialysis 
 sessions lasting 2–4 hours.
a. Anticoagulation. The strategy for heparin administra -
tion to infants and children is similar to that for adults. 
Clotting is infrequent when the ACT is prolonged to 
approximately 150% of the population baseline value. A 
“low-dose” heparin protocol would be used to prolong 
the clotting time to 125% of the population baseline 
value. The initial loading dosage is usually 10–20 units/
kg, with higher dosages being used for infants and chil-
dren weighing <15 kg. The initial maintenance heparin 
infusion rate ( for the first 20–30 minutes) can be set at 
0.3–0.5 units/kg/min, with further adjustments based on 
changes in the ACT. Low molecular weight heparin has 
been used in children receiving chronic hemodialysis. 
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia occurs in children, 
and anticoagulation has been successful with dan -
aparoid, hirudin, and argatroban, although published 
reports are few.
In older children, heparin-free dialysis can be per -
formed successfully. Different dialyzer membrane types 
have not been systematically compared with regard to 
clotting. Clotting will be more likely in smaller children, 
in whom the blood flow rate is usually low relative to 
the size of the dialyzer. Intermittent saline flushes of the 
dialysis circuit will result in excessive volume adminis-
tration in small children unless removal of excess fluid 
by ultrafiltration is carried out simultaneously.
b. Kinetic modeling of hemodialysis.  Formal three-point urea 
kinetic modeling of hemodialysis has been performed in 
children, and results are useful in assessing the efficiency 
of the dialysis treatment as well as dietary protein intake 
(as a function of urea generation rate) during the inter -
dialytic period. Recommended dietary protein intake in 
children is greater than that in adults, and the long-term 
effects of inadequate intake on growth and neurologic 
development are of even greater concern. The techni -
cal aspects of kinetic modeling are discussed in Chapter 
3 and are applied similarly in children. The slow-flow 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   706 09/10/14   1:44 am
707Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
technique for blood sampling is important for accurate 
measurement, and the duration of slow flow is deter -
mined by the volume of the blood line from the needle 
or catheter to the sampling port. Pediatric blood lines 
can be adequately cleared by a slow-flow rate (60 mL/
min) for 17 seconds; we predict infant lines will require 
12 seconds at a slow-flow rate of 20 mL/min. The greater 
reliance on catheters in pediatric dialysis raises concern 
that recirculation will diminish treatment efficiency.
c. Adequacy of hemodialysis. When small patients receive effi-
cient clearance (i.e., relatively high K/V), there is a greater 
amount of postdialysis urea rebound with reequilibra-
tion of urea from either the intracellular space or rela-
tively underperfused tissues. Thus, single-pool modeling 
overestimates dose of dialysis and urea generation rate. 
The NKF KDOQI 2006 recommendation in adults is for 
a minimum delivered dialysis dose of a single-pool Kt/V 
= 1.2. The guidelines recommend using single-pool Kt/V 
to guide therapy, but to increase the minimum dose 
for smaller patients, including children. A minimum 
spKt/V value of 1.4–1.5 would seem to be appropriate 
for children, and in practice, such a minimum value is 
easily achievable. Equilibrated Kt/V is recommended 
by the European Best Practice Guidelines, and this can 
be derived from single-pool Kt/V and the rate of dialy-
sis using the Tattersall equation described in Chapter 
3. Yet another approach is to extrapolate from a postdi-
alysis sample taken 15 minutes after dialysis (Goldstein, 
1999). Whether spKt/V or equilibrated Kt/V is used to 
target dose, it is prudent to err on the side of providing 
more therapy when treating this vulnerable population. 
Small children have a high surface area to total body 
water ratio, and alternative scaling of hemodialysis dose 
to body surface area would require even higher doses 
of Kt/V (Daugirdas, 2010). Residual renal function can 
significantly impact the hemodialysis prescription, espe-
cially in very small patients. Regular measurements are 
needed to ensure overall treatment adequacy as the GFR 
falls. If patients are unable to perform urine collections, 
they should be assumed to have no residual GFR to avoid 
inadvertent underdialysis.
d. Complications
1. Disequilibrium and seizures.  Infants and small children 
develop seizures as a manifestation of the disequi-
librium syndrome more commonly than adults. For 
this reason, the blood flow rate and session length 
are usually limited for the first few treatments. Overly 
rapid urea removal is generally avoided by choos-
ing an appropriately sized dialyzer and blood flow 
rate to provide 3 mL/min per kg urea clearance for 
the initial treatments; often, blood flows are limited 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   707 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
708
by the caliber of the dialysis access. Other measures 
sometimes utilized to help prevent disequilibrium 
syndrome include keeping the dialysate sodium at or 
slightly above the plasma level and the prophylactic 
infusion of mannitol (0.5–1.0 g/kg body weight) dur -
ing the hemodialysis session.
2. Hypotension. Intradialytic hypotension and cramping 
with fluid removal >5% of body weight are  common, 
yet interdialytic weight gains can be large in anuric 
children on largely liquid diets and in  noncompliant 
adolescents, resulting in sustained interdialytic hyper-
tension. Volume removal must be closely monitored 
because blood pressure is normally lower in children 
than in adults and there is a narrower margin to hypo-
tension. Infants and very young children are prone to 
precipitous falls in blood pressure with no warning 
and no ability to communicate distress. Isolated ultra-
filtration or lower dialysate temperature may make 
fluid removal more tolerable. If hypoalbuminemia is 
present, intravenous albumin infusion (0.5–1.5 g/kg) 
will increase oncotic pressure and may permit ultra-
filtration. Repeated treatments may be the only way to 
remove fluid safely, and small children often require 
four or five treatments per week for fluid and blood 
pressure management.
3. Hypothermia with isolated ultrafiltration.  If warmed dialy-
sis solution is not circulated, then the extracorpo-
real blood circuit will function as a radiator, cooling 
the blood and the child. Body temperature should 
be monitored throughout dialysis, especially during 
 isolated ultrafiltration.
 III. CARE OF THE PEDIATRIC ESKD PATIENT
A. Nutrition. Comprehensive nutritional management is impor -
tant for the achievement of growth and physical development 
through ESKD. The recommended energy intakes for pediat -
ric dialysis patients depend on their ages and should be the 
same as the estimated energy requirement (EER) for their non-
uremic counterparts. For infants, the EER for energy is approx-
imately 100 kcal/kg per day. Such high intakes usually require 
supplementation, and gavage feeding is standard practice to 
avoid undernutrition and growth failure. In older children, 
obesity has become a greater concern and can adversely affect 
posttransplant outcomes; thus nutrition counseling in this age 
group will be markedly different than in infants and toddlers.
Protein requirements for children depend on their age 
and are greater than those in adults. The daily recommended 
intake (DRI) of protein for pediatric dialysis patients is the 
same as that for their nonuremic counterparts plus an esti-
mate of amino acids and protein lost through dialysis. There is 
an emphasis on the early use of supplements, both orally and 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   708 09/10/14   1:44 am
709Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
through gastrostomy tubes. There is limited experience with 
the use of amino acid–containing PD fluids, although individ-
ual patients have been treated for up to a year.
Supplementation of water-soluble vitamins is routine 
practice for children treated with chronic PD or hemodialysis. 
Fat-soluble vitamins should not be supplemented as clearance 
of vitamin A metabolites is impaired, risking hypervitaminosis 
A; an appropriate multivitamin not containing vitamin A must 
be selected.
It is difficult to impose fluid, sodium, phosphate, and 
potassium restrictions on pediatric patients; however, such 
restrictions may be unnecessary when PD is the treatment 
modality. Potassium and phosphorus binders are almost 
always required for adolescents, yet some infants receiving 
efficient dialysis will require supplementation. For hemodialy-
sis patients, restrictions depend on the amount of residual uri-
nary output, but always require individual dietary guidance to 
achieve stringent fluid, sodium, and potassium intake. Infants 
pose a particular challenge; daily fluid intake in an anuric 
infant on hemodialysis should be limited to 400–500 mL/m 2, 
and formula should be concentrated and appropriately supple-
mented to achieve nutritional goals. However, polyuric infants 
will require supplemental fluid and sodium to maintain vol -
ume status and permit growth.
Enteral feeding supplements designed for adults should 
be used cautiously in young children. Fortunately a whey-based 
infant formula lower in phosphorus and potassium is available; 
infants with formula allergies and intolerances present special 
challenges. Oral hypersensitivity and food avoidance are com-
mon in infants and young children, and carefully timed solid 
food introduction with speech therapy is usually necessary.
B. Hypertension. Hypertension is a particular concern given the 
accelerated rate of cardiovascular disease in children with 
CKD. Attention is directed to the maintenance of normal vol-
ume status and age-appropriate blood pressure. High blood 
pressure in children undergoing PD is usually the result of 
incorrect dialysate glucose concentrations chosen at home 
coupled with excessive sodium and fluid intake; it is usually 
managed with dietary counseling, parent education, and close 
monitoring of weight and blood pressure at home. In hemodi-
alysis patients, hypertension may be the result of inadequate 
fluid removal during dialysis and nonadherence to sodium 
and fluid restrictions. In patients who remain hypertensive 
despite increased dialysis time, lowered dialysate tempera -
ture or isolated ultrafiltration may make volume removal 
more tolerable. Dietary and psychological counseling for the 
patient and family are advisable in cases of repeated nonad-
herence as this may reflect more serious difficulties in cop-
ing with the chronic disease process. Some patients remain 
hypertensive despite apparent euvolemia, and antihyperten-
sive medications are indicated. All antihypertensive agents 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   709 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
710
typically prescribed for adults have been used successfully in 
pediatric dialysis patients, and doses should be titrated to age- 
appropriate blood pressure targets and reassessed frequently.
C. Anemia. Children undergoing hemodialysis tend to be anemic 
more often than adults and have a lower hemoglobin at the 
initiation of dialysis. Children respond well to erythropoietin; 
the indications, route of administration, and potential com -
plications are similar for children and adults. Dosage per kilo-
gram is often higher in very young children (150–300 units/
kg per week) than in adults. Iron deficiency and repeated 
episodes of peritonitis adversely affect the erythropoietin 
response, and nonadherence to home therapy is occasionally 
a problem. Iron supplementation, either intravenous or oral, is 
usually necessary in pediatric ESKD patients; blood loss in the 
hemodialysis circuit is an important cause of iron deficiency 
in very small patients, especially when more than three treat-
ments per week are prescribed. Androgen therapy, rarely used 
in adults, is contraindicated in prepubertal children because it 
will lead to premature closure of epiphyses.
D. Growth. Few longitudinal studies describing growth in pediat -
ric patients undergoing CAPD or APD have been undertaken. 
Initial data comparing growth with CAPD or APD with that 
obtained with hemodialysis seemed to favor the PD approach; 
however, definitive controlled studies have not been per -
formed. In children undergoing CAPD or APD, improvement 
in growth has been linked to a reduction in the degree of sec-
ondary hyperparathyroidism. Others have attributed better 
growth with CAPD or APD to improved nutritional intake, but 
increasing energy intake much above the EER will not usually 
be of benefit.
1. Recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) therapy.  There is 
 evidence that rhGH treatment increases growth rate in 
children receiving chronic dialysis, although not as effec-
tively as in children with nondialysis CKD. The usual dos-
age is 0.05 mg/kg per day or 30 IU/m2 per week as a nightly 
subcutaneous injection, although other dosing strategies 
have been used. Slipped capital femoral epiphyses and 
worsening of metabolic bone disease may occur with rhGH; 
secondary hyperparathyroidism should be controlled prior 
to initiation of therapy. Growth hormone therapy is often 
paused at the time of renal transplantation, and growth 
velocity reassessed with a functioning allograft. Glucocor -
ticoid minimization or withdrawal is integral to successful 
growth after transplant.
2. Acidosis. Metabolic acidosis is common in children with 
ESKD and is more problematic in those receiving hemo-
dialysis than those treated with PD. Chronic acidosis may 
impair growth by affecting bone mineralization through 
the growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 axis, as 
well as exerting a catabolic effect on lean body mass. Some 
pediatric patients benefit from oral sodium bicarbonate 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   710 09/10/14   1:44 am
711Chapter 37 / Dialysis in Infants and Children 
or sodium citrate therapy or higher dialysate bicarbonate 
concentrations to maintain a serum bicarbonate concen -
tration ≥22 mmol/L.
3. Renal osteodystrophy . Renal osteodystrophy can be amelio -
rated in children undergoing dialysis treatment by good 
control of serum calcium, phosphorus, bicarbonate, intact 
parathyroid hormone, and alkaline phosphatase levels. 
Calcitriol and vitamin D analogs are used to treat hyper -
parathyroidism and associated bone disease. There are 
small series reporting the use of cinacalcet in children, 
but there is little guidance regarding dosing or outcomes 
in the youngest patients. Hyperphosphatemia should be 
 controlled by dietary manipulation and by oral adminis -
tration of phosphate binders to an age-appropriate serum 
phosphorus level. Phosphorus intake is targeted at or 
below the DRI for age with greater restriction in patients 
with hyperphosphatemia or hyperparathyroidism.  Calcium 
carbonate and calcium acetate have long been used as 
phosphate binders, but sevelamer is a good choice even 
in infants and young children because of a greater aware-
ness of the risks of calcium overload and recognition of 
early cardiac calcification in adolescents and young adults 
with ESKD. Calcium acetate is available in a liquid formu-
lation, and sevelamer is available in powder, which have 
facilitated dosing in infants and young children. The use 
of aluminum-containing phosphate binders should be 
avoided in infants and young children with CKD because of 
bone and neurotoxicity. There are no long-term data on the 
safety of lanthanum in children.
References and Suggested Readings
Ashkenazi DJ, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy in children ≤10 kg: a report 
from the prospective pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy  registry. 
J Pediatr. 2013;162:587–592.
Canepa A, et al. Use of new peritoneal dialysis solutions in children. Kidney Int.  
2008;73:S137–S144.
Daugirdas JT, et al. Dose of dialysis based on body surface area is markedly less in 
younger children than in older adolescents. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5:821–827.
Dolan NM, et al. Ventriculoperitoneal shunts in children on peritoneal dialysis: a sur-
vey of the International Pediatric Peritoneal Dialysis Network. Pediatr Nephrol.  
2013;28:315–319.
Fischbach M, Warady, B. Peritoneal dialysis prescription in children: bedside  principles 
for optimal practice. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009;24:1633–1642.
Furth SL, et al. Peritoneal dialysis catheter infections and peritonitis in children: a 
report of the North American Pediatric Renal Transplant Cooperative Study. 
 Pediatr Nephrol. 2000;15:179–182.
Goldstein SL, et al. Evaluation and prediction of urea rebound and equilibrated Kt/V in 
the pediatric hemodialysis population. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;34:49–54.
Goldstein SL, et al. Quality of life for children with chronic kidney disease. Semin 
Nephrol. 2006;26:114–117.
Gorman G, et al. Clinical outcomes and dialysis adequacy in adolescent hemo dialysis 
patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2006;47:285–293.
Hackbarth RM, et al. Zero balance ultrafiltration (Z-BUF) in blood-primed CRRT cir -
cuits achieves electrolyte and acid-base homeostasis prior to patient connection. 
Pediatr Nephrol. 2005;20:1328–1333.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   711 09/10/14   1:44 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
712
Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes. Clinical practice guildeline for 
chronic kidney disease-mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD). Kidney Int.  
2009; 76(suppl 113):S1–S130.
Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes. Clinical practice guildeline for acute kid-
ney injury. Kidney Int. 2012;2(suppl 1):1–138.
Kramer AM, et al. Demographics of blood pressure and hypertension in children on 
renal replacement therapy in Europe. Kidney Int. 2011;80:1092–1098.
Mendley SR. Acute dialysis in children. In: Henrich WL, ed. Principles and Practice of 
Dialysis, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:641–652.
Monagle P , et al. Antithrombotic therapy in children: the Seventh ACCP  Conference 
on antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy. Chest. 2004;126(suppl 3):645S–687S.
National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI clinical practice guidelines for hemodialysis 
adequacy, update 2006. Guideline 8. Pediatric hemodialysis prescription and ade-
quacy. Am J Kidney Dis. 2006;48(suppl 1):S45–S47.
National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI clinical practice guidelines for peritoneal dialysis 
adequacy, update 2006. Guideline 6. Pediatric peritoneal dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2006;48(suppl 1): S127–S129.
Rees L, et al. Growth in very young children undergoing chronic peritoneal dialysis. 
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;22:2303–2312.
Schaefer F, et al. Peritoneal transport properties and dialysis dose affect growth and 
nutritional status in children on chronic peritoneal dialysis. Mid-European Pedi-
atric PD Study Group. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1999;10:1786–1792.
Shmitt CP , et al. Effect of the dialysis fluid buffer on peritoneal membrane function in 
children. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;8:108–115.
Smye SW , et al. Paediatric haemodialysis: estimation of treatment efficiency in the 
presence of urea rebound. Clin Phys Physiol Meas. 1992;13:51–62.
Sutherland SM, et al. Fluid overload and mortality in children receiving continuous 
renal replacement therapy: the prospective pediatric continuous renal replace-
ment therapy registry. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;55:316–325.
Symons JM, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy with an automated monitor 
is superior to a free-flow system during extracorporeal life support. Pediatr Crit 
Care Med. 2013;14:e404–e408.
Warady B, et al. Pediatric Dialysis. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic; 2004.
Warady BA, et al. Consensus guidelines for the prevention and treatment of 
 catheter-related infections and peritonitis in pediatric patients receiving perito-
neal dialysis: 2012 update. Perit Dial Int. 2012;32(suppl 2):S32–S86.
Web References
North American Pediatric Renal Trials and Collaborative Studies Annual Dialysis: 
https://web.emmes.com/study/ped/annlrept/annualrept2011.pdf.
Pediatric Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy website: http://www.pcrrt.com/.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch037.indd   712 09/10/14   1:44 am