713
Cardiovascular Disease
Daniel E. Weiner and Mark J. Sarnak
38
In end stage kidney disease (ESKD) patients, mortality due to 
 cardiovascular disease (CVD) is 10 to 30 times higher than in the 
general population. For example, a 30-year-old dialysis patient has 
a similar CVD mortality risk to that of an 80-year-old in the general 
population. This increased risk likely reflects the very high prevalence 
of CVD, increased prevalence and severity of diabetes, hypertension 
and left ventricular hypertrophy, and nontraditional risk factors such 
as chronic volume overload, hyperphosphatemia, anemia, oxidant 
stress, and other aspects of the uremic milieu (Table 38.1). In this 
chapter, we focus on epidemiology and management of traditional 
and nontraditional CVD risk factors, and on ischemic heart disease, 
heart failure, pericardial effusion, valvular disease, and arrhythmia.
 I. TRADITIONAL RISK FACTORS
A. Blood pressure.  Data on blood pressure targets and optimal 
strategies and agents for blood pressure management in dial -
ysis remain insufficient (Inrig, 2010). These are discussed in 
 further detail in Chapter 33.
B. Diabetes. Dialysis patients with diabetes are at higher risk 
for acute coronary syndromes and have worse outcomes 
 following coronary interventions than those without diabe-
tes.  Additionally, there is increased prevalence of heart failure. 
Poor blood glucose control (as assessed by glycosylated hemo-
globin levels) is associated with increased mortality in dialysis 
patients, although precise targets remain uncertain. Cohort 
data suggest that a hemoglobin A1C threshold of 8% may be 
a reasonable target in healthier dialysis patients for cardiovas-
cular risk reduction (Ricks, 2012), while less stringent targets 
may be appropriate in those with more extensive comorbidity. 
See Chapter 32.
C. Smoking. Smoking is associated with progression in early stage 
CKD patients, and may well adversely impact residual kidney 
function in dialysis patients. Smoking strongly associates 
with all-cause mortality in dialysis patients and likely associ-
ates with CVD. Critically, in USRDS data, former smokers had 
a similar risk as lifelong nonsmokers, suggesting a benefit of 
smoking cessation and a role for directed intervention.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   713 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
714
D. Dyslipidemia
1. Lipid profile patterns.  Dyslipidemia is very common in all 
stages of kidney disease, including both hemodialysis and 
peritoneal dialysis patients. Dyslipidemia, particularly 
high low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and high 
triglyceride levels, is particularly common in peritoneal 
dialysis, where the glucose-enriched milieu predisposes to 
a more atherogenic lipid profile. In dialysis, similar to many 
advanced chronic disease states, the relationship of total or 
LDL cholesterol to mortality is “U”-shaped; patients with 
high cholesterol levels, likely due to increased atherogenic 
risk, and also patients with low levels, likely due to associ-
ated malnutrition, both are at heightened risk (Kilpatrick, 
2007). Total cholesterol and, in particular, high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels may be reduced, and 
atherogenic lipoprotein remnants and lipoprotein (a) are 
often increased.
Nearly one-third of dialysis patients have hypertri -
glyceridemia, defined by levels above 200 mg/dL (2.26 
mmol/L), with levels occasionally 600 mg/dL (6.8 mmol/L) 
or higher. The predominant underlying cause is a defi-
ciency of lipoprotein lipase, resulting in reduced lipolysis of 
triglyceride (TG)-rich very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) 
and yielding high quantities of atherogenic remnant lipo -
proteins. Enrichment of LDL particles with triglycerides 
also suggests partial deficiency of hepatic lipase. These 
basic defects may be enhanced by β-adrenergic blockers, 
high-carbohydrate diets, absorption of glucose from peri-
toneal dialysate, the use of heparin, and decreased hepatic 
blood flow from cardiac disease.
2. Measurement. If not previously assessed, it is likely worth-
while to evaluate a lipid profile at least once in all dialysis 
Traditional Risk Factors Nontraditional Risk Factors
Older age
Male gender
Hypertension
Diabetes
Smoking
Dyslipidemia
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Physical inactivity
Menopause
Family history of cardiovascular 
disease
Extracellular fluid volume overload
Abnormal calcium/phosphate metabolism
Vitamin D deficiency
Anemia
Oxidant Stress
Inflammation
Homocysteine
Malnutrition
Albuminuria
Thrombogenic factors
Sleep disturbances
Altered nitric oxide/endothelin balance
Marinobufagenin
Uremic toxins
38.1
TA b LE
Traditional and Nontraditional Cardiovascular Risk Factors
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   714 09/10/14   1:46 am
715Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
patients. This can establish a diagnosis of severe hypercho-
lesterolemia or hypertriglyceridemia (i.e., 1,000 mg/dL [11.3 
mmol/L] or higher) that may prompt focused treatment or 
evaluation for secondary causes of dyslipidemia (Miller, 
2011). Lipid panels are optimally obtained in the fasting 
state, particularly for evaluation of serum triglyceride lev-
els, although, as many dialysis patients receive treatments 
in the afternoon or evening and data on therapy efficacy 
are limited, a random screening may be most practical.
The current KDIGO lipid guideline, similar to the re-
cent American Heart Association guideline, notes limited 
data to support dose escalation of lipid-lowering therapies 
and therefore favors a “fire-and-forget” strategy (KDIGO 
Lipid Work group, 2013). Accordingly, in patients already 
treated with a high potency statin, there is no indication to 
routinely measure cholesterol. Similarly, in dialysis  patients 
not currently treated with a statin, given the data discussed 
below on statin efficacy for CVD prevention, there is no 
 indication to routinely measure cholesterol.
3. T reatment
a. Principles. Treatment strategies for dyslipidemia include 
medications and lifestyle modifications. As in the general 
population, first-line therapy for most patients is dietary 
and lifestyle modification, including exercise whenever 
feasible. While the utility of lifestyle modifications for 
changing the lipid profile remains uncertain, there is 
little drawback to this strategy, particularly given other 
potential benefits, minimal risk, and a lack of benefit on 
hard outcomes associated with pharmacologic therapy.
Dietary prescriptions are best accomplished with 
guidance from a nutritionist with experience in man -
agement of kidney disease patients. Recommenda-
tions listed in Chapter 31 should generally be followed. 
These include consumption of a diet containing about 
 25%–35% of total calories as fat; of this, about 20% should 
be monounsatured, 10% polyunsaturated, and <7% sat -
urated fat. In patients with hypertriglyceridemia, mild 
restriction of total carbohydrate intake and limitation 
of the use of refined carbohydrate may be indicated. 
Additionally, alcohol ingestion should be discouraged. 
Despite the risk of malnutrition in many dialysis patients, 
there may be a minority where overall calorie restric -
tion is indicated to achieve ideal body weight, especially 
among those receiving peritoneal dialysis. In PD patients, 
sodium restriction may reduce the use of higher dialy-
sate glucose concentrations; this would yield less glucose 
absorption and decrease the stimulus for hypertriglyceri-
demia (see Chapter 29). If possible, physical training and 
regular exercise are recommended as they may result in 
an improved cardiovascular risk profile and an improved 
sense of well-being.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   715 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
716
b. Statin therapy. Although dialysis patients are in the high-
est risk group for CVD events, several large clinical trials 
have failed to show a significant benefit with statin ther-
apy, despite substantial LDL-C lowering with therapy in 
these trials. Accordingly, in contrast to the prior KDOQI 
guideline, the 2013 KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline 
for Lipid Management in Chronic Kidney Disease sug-
gests that statins or a statin/ezetimibe combination not 
be initiated in adults with dialysis-dependent CKD.
In incident dialysis patients already being treated 
with statin therapy, these medications likely should be 
continued. This conclusion is based on results from the 
Study of Heart and Renal Protection (SHARP), which 
enrolled not only dialysis patients but also more than 
6,000 individuals with stage 3b and 4 CKD, more than 
2,000 of whom progressed to require dialysis or kid-
ney transplant. In general, simvastatin/ezetimibe was 
continued during kidney replacement therapy, and, in 
analyses of SHARP participants who at baseline did not 
require dialysis, statin/ezetimibe therapy was associ-
ated with significant cardiovascular event reduction. As 
many of these individuals continued on therapy follow-
ing dialysis initiation, it seems reasonable to continue 
statin therapy in individuals treated with statins at the 
time of dialysis initiation. Although there are no studies 
evaluating dialysis patients with an acute myocardial 
 infarction (MI) who were not previously treated with a 
statin, it also seems reasonable to initiate statin therapy 
in those with a relatively good longer-term prognosis.
One area of insufficient knowledge is peritoneal 
 dialysis (PD). SHARP included 496 PD patients, but, aside 
from SHARP , PD patients have not been included in clini-
cal trials. In SHARP , there was a trend to a benefit with 
lipid-lowering therapy versus placebo in this subgroup. 
Similarly, in a post hoc analysis of the US Renal Data Sys-
tem observation Dialysis Morbidity and Mortality Wave 2 
cohort that used propensity score matching, lipid- lowering 
therapy in PD patients was associated with a significantly 
reduced risk of all-cause and cardiovascular death.
In sum, based on available data, statins should be 
continued in those individuals already using these agents, 
with attention paid to dose and drug-drug interactions 
(Table 38.2). Additionally, in dialysis patients not previ -
ously prescribed a statin, in the opinion of the authors, 
statin treatment of those dialysis patients with longer life 
expectancies (i.e., individuals listed for transplantation) 
or those experiencing recent acute coronary syndromes 
may be appropriate. Given the paucity of data in perito-
neal dialysis but physiology that suggests higher athero-
sclerosis risk, a “fire-and-forget” approach may also be 
beneficial in PD patients (Goldfarb-Rumyantzev, 2007).
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   716 09/10/14   1:46 am
717Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
Agent Dose Adjustment 
in Dialysis
Notes
Statinsa
Atorvastatin None
Fluvastatin ↓ to 50% Decrease dosage by half at GFR <30
Lovastatin ↓ to 50% Decrease dosage by half at GFR <30
Pravastatin No Starting dose of 10 mg/d 
recommended for GFR <60
Rosuvastatin ↓ Decrease to a maximum of 10 mg/d 
at GFR <30; recommended starting 
dose is 5 mg/d
Simvastatin See note If GFR <10, start at 5 mg/d and 
use doses above 10 mg daily 
with caution; may interact with 
amlodipine and other calcium 
channel blockers
Bile Acid Sequestrants
Cholestyramine No Not absorbed
Cholestipol No Not absorbed
Colesevelam No Not absorbed
Fibratesb
bezafibrate See note Concurrent use of fibrates and 
statins contraindicated in advanced 
CKD.
Ciprofibrate See note
Clofibrate See note
Fenofibrate See note
Gemfibrozil See note
Miscellaneous
Ezetimibe No None
Nicotinic Acid ↓ to 50% May worsen glycemic control and 
cause orthostasis, hyperuricemia, 
and flushing; may have phosphorus 
binding effects
a Statins may interact with other medications used in dialysis patients, including calcineurin inhibi-
tors, several antibiotics, and, potentially, calcium channel blockers.
b Based on package inserts, all fibrates are contraindicated in dialysis patients. Small short-term 
studies have safely utilized fibrates in dialysis patients, with one study using gemfibrozil 600 mg 
twice daily and another using fenofibrate 100 mg daily without any serious adverse effects. The 
FIELD trial of 9795 patients with type 2 diabetes evaluated fenofibrate 200 mg daily versus placebo 
and noted no adverse safety signals in the 519 patient subset with stage 3 CKD.
38.2
TA b LE
Lipid-lowering Medication Dose Adjustments for Reduced GFR
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   717 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
718
While statin use is generally safe in the dialysis 
population, a number of medications increase blood lev-
els of statins via co-metabolism by hepatic cytochrome 
P450 enzymes; these include calcineurin inhibitors, 
macrolide antibiotics, azole antifungal agents, calcium 
channel blockers, fibrates, and nicotinic acid, and are 
best documented with simvastatin. Potential drug–drug 
interactions should be assessed in each patient. Statins 
may cause myopathy, and the risk of myopathy may be 
increased in CKD. This is particularly apparent with con-
current use of fibrates, and this combination should be 
avoided in CKD.
c. Hypertriglyceridemia management.  Statins have some effect 
in lowering serum triglyceride level, although they are 
less effective than fibrates and/or nicotinic acid for 
this  purpose. In contrast, bile acid resins may actually 
increase triglyceride levels. There are no data support -
ing a benefit of fibrates or nicotinic acid on outcome 
improvement in dialysis patients, particularly in those 
with only modest elevations in serum triglyceride level 
(<500 mg/dL [<5.7 mmol/L]), and these agents should 
not be first-line therapy in this setting. Based on this 
paucity of data, the 2013 KDIGO guidelines state that: 
“Fibric acid derivatives are not recommended to prevent 
pancreatitis or reduce cardiovascular risk in adults with 
CKD and hypertriglyceridemia. ” There are no data to 
guide treatment decisions in dialysis patients with very 
high TG levels ( >500 mg/dL [>5.7 mmol/L]); accord-
ingly, treatment decisions need to balance potential 
risks associated with severe hypertriglyceridemia with 
the risks and benefits associated with therapy. Of note, 
adequate data do not exist to guide fibrate dosing in 
dialysis patients as the safety of this class has not been 
assessed sufficiently in dialysis patients. Small studies 
and reports suggest that fibrates may be safe, although 
some dose reduction may be prudent if these agents are 
used in dialysis (Table 38.2) and concurrent use with 
a statin is contraindicated. Available fibrates include 
gemfibrozil, bezafibrate, ciprofibrate, clofibrate, and 
fenofibrate.
d. Other lipid-lowering agents.  Alternatives to statins and 
fibrates include bile acid sequestrants (including the 
phosphate binder, sevelamer), nicotinic acid, and ezeti-
mibe. Bile acid sequestrants can interfere with absorp-
tion of other medications; bile acid sequestrants should 
not be used when triglycerides (TG) are >400 mg/dL  
(>4.5 mmol/L), and their use is relatively contrain-
dicated when TG are >200 mg/dL (>2.3 mmol/L) 
since they may increase triglycerides in some patients. 
Doses do not need to be reduced in dialysis patients 
(Table 38.2). Sevelamer acts by the same mechanism to 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   718 09/10/14   1:46 am
719Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
lower both total and LDL cholesterol, and may be a good 
choice when phosphorus binding is also desired. While 
not as effective for LDL lowering, nicotinic acid has the 
greatest favorable effects on HDL cholesterol levels of 
available drug therapies, and also lowers serum triglyc-
eride levels. However, there are no data to support a 
benefit of nicotinic acid on CVD or mortality outcomes. 
Dosage should be reduced by about 50% in ESKD, given 
its substantial renal excretion. The potential of nicotin -
amide as a phosphorus binder has been advocated, but 
data are inadequate to support this indication. Adverse 
effects can include hyperglycemia and hepatotoxicity in 
individuals with underlying liver disease or when high 
doses are used. Flushing may be attenuated with concur-
rent aspirin use or by giving longer-acting preparations. 
Nicotinic acid is more often used as a first-line therapy 
when severe hypertriglyceridemia ( >500 mg/dL, or 
5.8 mmol/L) needs to be treated to protect against pan-
creatitis, or when a statin is contraindicated. Ezetimibe 
is a drug that inhibits cholesterol absorption. There are 
few data available on its use in kidney failure, although 
its use in conjunction with simvastatin in SHARP sug-
gests safety.
E. Left ventricular hypertrophy
1. Epidemiology. Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is highly 
prevalent, frequently developing prior to the need for kid-
ney replacement therapy, and likely reflecting pressure and 
volume overload (KDOQI CVD, 2005). Over 30% of par -
ticipants in the Frequent Hemodialysis Network studies, a 
group that overall was healthier than the general dialysis 
population, had LVH at study entry (defined using cardiac 
magnetic resonance imaging), with other studies show-
ing prevalence rates of (50%–75%) patients. LVH in dialy-
sis patients is an independent risk factor for subsequent 
adverse cardiovascular events and death.
Most LVH is initially concentric, representing a uni-
form increase in wall thickness secondary to pressure over-
load from hypertension, stiffened blood vessels, or aortic 
stenosis. Anemia and volume overload resulting from 
chronic inability to effectively remove ingested sodium 
and fluid may each result in eccentric hypertrophy. The 
endpoint is often a dilated cardiomyopathy with eventual 
reduction in systolic function. These end-stage patients 
typically have low blood pressure and may be responsible 
for the “J”-shaped (or “U”-shaped) relationship observed 
between blood pressure and mortality in dialysis patients.
LVH most often is diagnosed with echocardiography, 
an inexpensive, noninvasive widely available test. Cardiac 
function should be assessed in the euvolemic state, as both 
significant volume depletion and overload may reduce 
left ventricular inotropy. Accordingly, in dialysis patients, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   719 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
720
two-dimensional echocardiography is likely to be most 
 informative if performed on a day during the interdialytic 
interval. While three-dimensional echocardiography may 
be useful to assess left ventricle (LV) structure as it avoids 
the use of geometric assumptions of LV shape that are re-
quired to estimate LV mass and volume, the increasing 
availability of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging likely 
provides the most accurate assessment of LV structure. 
Screening echocardiography is currently recommended 
for incident dialysis patients; however, there is no evidence 
that this improves clinical outcomes.
2. Prevention and management.  Some data suggest that with 
modification of risk factors, including anemia and sys-
tolic blood pressure, strict management of volume, 
management of mineral and bone disorder, and use of 
ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker therapy, 
regression of LVH may occur in dialysis patients. Data are 
inconsistent on whether high flow arteriovenous fistulas 
may lead to maladaptive cardiac remodeling. That regres -
sion of LVH results in reduced CV events and decreased 
mortality risk appears likely, as multiple post hoc analy-
ses have shown a lower risk of adverse events in partici-
pants in whom LVH regressed over the course of clinical 
trials. Accordingly, in dialysis populations, LVH has been 
used both as a factor in determining study eligibility and 
as a surrogate outcome to infer subsequent CV and mor -
tality risk reduction.
With regard to RAAS inhibition, the largest outcomes 
study to date evaluating the effect of renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system blockade in dialysis patients with LVH 
was the Fosinopril in Dialysis Study which randomized 397 
hemodialysis patients to fosinopril versus placebo, and 
showed no benefit on cardiovascular events over a 2-year 
period (Zannad, 2006). Other trials examining left ven-
tricular mass reduction have, however, suggested a benefit. 
Randomized trials in CKD targeting normalization of he-
moglobin levels with recombinant human erythropoietin 
had no effect on left ventricular mass. In hemodialysis 
patients enrolled in the Frequent Hemodialysis Network 
study, those who received more frequent hemodialysis had 
a significant improvement in LV mass; whether this benefit 
was mediated through improved control of blood pressure, 
volume, phosphorus, or other factors is uncertain.
 II. NONTRADITIONAL RISK F ACTORS. These are listed in Table 38.1. In-
depth discussion of some of these is beyond the scope of the 
Handbook, but we briefly summarize the most pertinent issues. 
Volume control is discussed in chapters 12, 26, and 33.
A. Mineral and bone disorder. Mineral and bone disorders, discussed 
in Chapter 36, may affect the cardiovascular system in multiple 
ways (Lau & Ix, 2013). First, both elevated PTH and reduced 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   720 09/10/14   1:46 am
721Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
1,25-vitamin D levels may directly affect the myocardium, pro-
moting hypertrophy. Second, hyperphosphatemia, positive 
calcium balance in the setting of impaired bone buffering, and 
other factors in the uremic milieu including loss of calcification 
inhibitors can combine to promote vascular calcification. Third, 
other hormones, including FGF23, may promote LVH and may 
also act independently or through other calcification promoters 
to promote vascular calcification. Vascular calcification occurs 
at both the arterial media and the intima, with medial calcifi-
cation generally more pronounced among dialysis patients. 
Medial calcification is associated with stiffer blood vessels, 
as evidenced by increased pulse wave velocity. This increases 
cardiac afterload and promotes LVH. Furthermore, during the 
cardiac cycle, the systolic pressure wave normally reflects back 
onto the heart during early diastole, promoting coronary fill -
ing. With stiffened arteries and increased pulse wave velocity, 
this reflected wave returns to the heart prematurely—during 
late systole. This results in loss of the coronary filling effect 
and increased afterload as the heart has to pump against the 
reflected pressure wave from the previous contraction.
Vascular calcification may be diagnosed in several ways. 
Plain radiographs are specific but insensitive, while electron 
beam and spiral computed tomography are sensitive and spe-
cific but expensive and associated with significant radiation 
exposure on repeated use. Ultrasound, most commonly of the 
carotid arteries, is relatively inexpensive and noninvasive, but 
requires a trained operator and may lack precision to closely 
track changes over time. Use of such tests needs to be justi -
fied by their impact on clinical decision making. At the present 
time, there is no reliable method of reversing cardiac calcifica-
tion, although some studies have suggested that use of non-
calcium-containing binders results in more favorable calcium 
balance. Dialysis prescriptions resulting in negative phospho -
rus balance also may slow progression of calcification. A rea-
sonable strategy may be to limit the use of calcium-containing 
phosphorus binders in patients in whom extensive vascular 
calcification has been documented. This is discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 36.
B. Anemia. Anemia is common in CKD patients, especially at 
 dialysis initiation, and its severity correlates with the extent 
of LVH. While in observational studies, patients with higher 
hemoglobin levels have fewer cardiovascular disease events, 
treatment with recombinant erythropoietin to raise hemo -
globin levels to the normal range may be associated with 
increased cardiovascular risk. Anemia management is dis -
cussed in detail in Chapter 34.
C. Sleep. Sleep abnormalities, discussed in Chapter 40, are highly 
prevalent in dialysis patients and are associated with coronary 
artery disease. Nocturnal hypoxemia associated with sleep 
apnea is associated with increased CVD events and may rep-
resent a potentially modifiable risk factor.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   721 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
722
D. Oxidant stress and inflammation.  Numerous factors in the dialy-
sis patient increase oxidant stress and inflammation burden. 
These include dialysis using catheters, underlying illness and 
infection, malnutrition, and perhaps the dialysis procedure 
itself. Many protective mechanisms against inflammation are 
impaired, including reduced serum levels of free thiols such 
as glutathione. Retained, failed arteriovenous (AV) grafts, or 
kidney allografts also may be a source of continued inflam-
matory stimulus. At this time, specific treatment strategies to 
reduce inflammation or oxidant stress are neither widely used 
nor adequately supported by randomized trials, and results of 
studies investigating the potential benefit of antioxidant ther-
apies in the dialysis population have been disappointing.
 III. ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE
A. Overview. Acute myocardial infarction (MI) and acute coro-
nary syndromes are exceedingly common in the ESKD pop-
ulation and associated with poor outcomes. One study in 
Taiwan demonstrated 30% 1-year mortality following acute 
coronary syndrome in dialysis patients, while US data show 
a 50% higher in-hospital mortality rate for dialysis patients 
admitted with acute MI (Herzog, 2007) and 1-year mortality of 
approximately 60%.
Both atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis contribute to 
pathogenesis; arteriosclerosis, often synonymous with vascu-
lar stiffness and manifesting as a loss of arterial elasticity, may 
result in LVH with subsequent increased myocardial oxygen 
demand and altered coronary perfusion followed ultimately by 
subendocardial ischemia. Small vessel coronary artery disease 
also plays a role: in one study, up to 50% of nondiabetic dialysis 
patients with symptoms of myocardial ischemia did not have 
significant large caliber coronary artery disease, implicating 
isolated small vessel disease as a cause of ischemia.
B. Diagnosis. Routine screening is not currently recommended for 
dialysis patients, and even screening of asymptomatic trans -
plant candidates is controversial. There are no pre-operative 
screening guidelines specific to dialysis patients, and it is 
reasonable to use general population guidelines, recogniz -
ing that the extent of comorbid conditions prevalent in the 
dialysis population is likely to place them into the highest 
cardiovascular risk group. Because many dialysis patients 
are unable to achieve adequate exercise levels for valid stress 
tests, pharmacologic stress tests should be used in this popu-
lation. Furthermore, because of the high incidence of baseline 
electrocardiogram abnormalities, either nuclear or echocar -
diographic imaging should be utilized in stress testing. There 
is no absolute contraindication to cardiac catheterization in 
patients treated with dialysis, although preservation of exist -
ing kidney function is an important consideration, especially 
in those treated with PD, and the associated risk of contrast 
nephropathy should be kept in mind.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   722 09/10/14   1:46 am
723Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
Diagnosis of acute MI can be challenging , as cardiac bio-
marker levels, including troponins, may be elevated chroni -
cally (DeFilippi, 2003). Chronic troponin elevation itself is a 
marker of worse prognosis, likely representing ongoing injury 
and subclinical ischemia. The American Heart Association sug-
gests that, if chronic, minor elevations in cardiac biomarkers in 
kidney failure should not be classified as injury; however, rising 
and/or falling cardiac biomarker levels in the appropriate clini-
cal setting likely are consistent with acute MI (Thygesen, 2012).
C. Prevention. There are few clinical trials evaluating primary and 
secondary prevention strategies in dialysis patients. If hem -
orrhagic risk and blood pressure permit, aspirin, β-blockers, 
ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers, and nitrate 
preparations may all be appropriate for secondary prevention.
D. T reatment
1. Management of angina pectoris and stable coronary artery disease.  
The pharmacologic approach to angina in dialysis patients 
is likely similar to that in the general population. The 
progressive introduction of sublingual nitrates, oral long-  
acting nitrates, β-blockers, and calcium channel blockers is 
appropriate. Usual dosages of sublingual and oral nitrates 
can be given to dialysis patients.
While there is strong evidence for the benefits of 
 aspirin for secondary prevention of atherosclerotic CVD 
events in individuals with intact kidney function and coro-
nary artery disease, with or without ischemic cardiomy-
opathy, there are conflicting reports of worse heart failure 
outcomes associated with aspirin use in patients with kid-
ney disease. This may relate to attenuation of the beneficial 
effects of ACE inhibitors due to aspirin-mediated inhibi-
tion of kinin-mediated prostaglandin synthesis. Limited 
observational data in dialysis patients have not shown a 
 beneficial effect on cardiovascular outcomes associated 
with low-dose aspirin, but these reports are limited by 
study design. Clinical trials examining aspirin use and use 
of other antiplatelet agents for access patency show no 
 evidence of harm associated with aspirin or clopidogrel 
use, but benefit remains uncertain. At this time, given the 
significant benefits of aspirin use in nondialysis patients 
with coronary artery disease, there is insufficient evidence 
to recommend against the use of aspirin in dialysis patients 
with coronary artery disease.
2. Chest pain during the hemodialysis session.  For patients who 
develop chest pain primarily during the hemodialysis ses -
sion, a number of potential therapeutic options are avail -
able. Nasal oxygen may be beneficial in this setting. If the 
anginal episode is associated with hypotension, initial 
treatment should include raising the blood pressure by 
elevating the feet and by cautiously administering saline. 
Sublingual nitroglycerin can be given if the blood pressure 
has increased to a clinically acceptable value. Possibly, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   723 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
724
the blood flow rate should be reduced and ultrafiltration 
should be stopped until the anginal episode subsides. 
Cooling the dialysate may also help maintain cardiac per -
fusion, particularly in individuals prone to intradialytic 
hypotension (Selby, 2006). Predialysis administration of 
2% nitroglycerin ointment may be of benefit when applied 
1 hour prior to a hemodialysis session, assuming that the 
blood pressure will tolerate this intervention. Predialysis 
administration of β -blockers and oral nitrates may be of 
benefit, but must be done cautiously because the risk of 
hypotension during the dialysis session may be increased. 
Of note, several β -blockers require dose reduction in 
dialysis patients, including atenolol, which has extensive 
kidney clearance. Among commonly used β-blockers, 
atenolol and metoprolol are extensively cleared with 
hemodialysis, while carvedilol and labetolol do not have 
substantial dialysis-related clearance. Calcium channel 
blockers could be of use in situations where β -blockade 
is contraindicated or inadequate; however, given the 
negative cardiac inotropy associated with this class and 
the high prevalence of systolic dysfunction in dialysis 
patients, calcium channel blockers, particularly the non -
dihydropyridines (diltiazem and verapamil), should be 
used with caution.
3. Revascularization. The optimal treatment of coronary artery 
disease in dialysis patients remains uncertain. Medical 
management, percutaneous intervention (PCI) including 
angioplasty with use of either drug eluting or bare metal 
stents, and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, all 
have roles in individualized care (Charytan, 2014).
Given the high periprocedural risks associated with 
CABG, if anatomy permits and symptoms persist despite 
medical management, PCI is likely the better approach for 
patients who are not transplant candidates or at higher 
perioperative risk if undergoing CABG. As in the general 
population, CABG incorporates greater short-term risk 
in exchange for longer-term benefits, and balancing this 
trade-off is essential to individualizing therapy. For PCI, 
data are insufficient to support drug eluting stents over 
bare metal stents, and a key determination for stent type 
may be whether an individual dialysis patient can safely 
use clopidogrel for 1 year or more; if longer-term clopido-
grel use is an option, many interventionalists will select a 
drug eluting stent based on general population and early 
stage CKD data. As with most procedures, those done on 
an emergent basis are associated with worse outcomes. 
Thrombolytics and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists are 
likely beneficial, particularly when interventional cardiol -
ogy is unavailable, but may be associated with a higher risk 
of bleeding complications.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   724 09/10/14   1:46 am
725Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
 I V. CARDIOMYOPATHY AND HEART FAILURE
A. Pathophysiology. Heart failure is highly prevalent and related to 
many common factors in the dialysis population. Although 
there is no universally accepted definition, heart failure is 
generally characterized by volume overload, pulmonary 
edema, and dyspnea. Heart failure may occur as a result of 
left ventricular dysfunction (systolic dysfunction) or diastolic 
dysfunction in which the LV has a normal ejection fraction 
but impaired filling. Diastolic dysfunction is often associ-
ated with LVH and systemic hypertension, both of which 
are extremely common in dialysis patients. Systolic dysfunc -
tion is frequently a result of ischemic disease and dilated 
cardiomyopathy. For obvious reasons, dialysis patients are 
particularly vulnerable to fluid overload, and pulmonary 
edema in the setting of marked fluid overload may not rep-
resent cardiac dysfunction. However, frequent pulmonary 
edema with minimal intradialytic weight gain may be an 
important clue of cardiac dysfunction. An additional clue 
may be  dialysis-related hypotension, as dysfunctional hearts 
likely have reduced capacity for adaptation to intravascular 
volume loss. Furthermore, ultrafiltration may never allow 
accumulation of excess fluid, rendering hypotension the sole 
manifestation of heart failure.
Although the diagnosis of heart failure is clinical, echo-
cardiography is invaluable for diagnosing systolic and diastolic 
dysfunction. Echocardiography may also suggest the cause 
of disease, identifying wall motion abnormalities that may 
indicate ischemia and infarcts, LVH that may predispose to 
diastolic dysfunction, and valvular disease with its effects on 
cardiac morphology. KDOQI guidelines recommend obtaining 
echocardiograms at dialysis initiation after dry weight is estab-
lished and every 3 years thereafter; these recommendations 
are opinion-based (KDOQI CVD, 2005).
B. T reatment.  Chronic therapy for heart failure in dialysis patients 
has not been adequately studied; therefore, most recommen-
dations are either extrapolated from the general population or 
based on smaller trials. Restriction of sodium intake, including 
avoidance of routine sodium modeling, is important, since, 
with most thrice-weekly hemodialysis schedules, the ability to 
remove excess fluid is limited. More frequent dialysis thera -
pies, including daily hemodialysis and PD, may help optimize 
volume status. Maintaining a balance between fluid overload 
on the one hand and symptomatic hypotension on the other 
may be extremely difficult in some dialysis patients. In the 
future, newer technologies, including intradialytic blood vol-
ume monitoring and bioimpedance analysis, may have more 
clearly delineated roles for optimizing volume management. 
In general, we favor maintenance of near euvolemia over phar-
macologic therapy in the treatment of heart failure in dialysis 
patients.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   725 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
726
1. Traditional drug therapy
a. ACE inhibitors  are beneficial in nonuremic patients with 
chronic heart failure and may be beneficial in dialysis 
patients, with one prior meta-analysis showing a reduc-
tion in LV mass. There are limited data showing a sur -
vival benefit with these agents. One small Italian study 
did show a mortality benefit with dual ACE inhibitor and 
ARB therapy versus ACE inhibitor therapy alone in hemo-
dialysis patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction 
below 40%, a strategy that is not routinely recommended 
(Cice, 2010). On the other hand, one relatively large ran-
domized trial of olmesartan versus placebo failed to 
show any improvement in terms of cardiovascular event 
rate or death (Iseki, 2013). Major limitations associated 
with use of these agents include hypotension and hyper-
kalemia. If there is a contraindication to ACE inhibitor 
use, it seems reasonable to extrapolate from data in the 
general population and substitute angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARBs). Most ACE inhibitors are cleared during 
dialysis while ARBs are not dialyzable.
b. a-Blockers, another mainstay of heart failure therapy in 
the general population, also are of uncertain benefit in 
the dialysis population. In an Italian study, carvedilol, 
well studied for heart failure in the general population, 
reduced mortality in dialysis patients with left ventric -
ular dysfunction (Cice, 2003). Carvedilol dosing is the 
same as in the general population. One small trial com-
pared thrice weekly posthemodialysis administration of 
lisinopril with atenolol (Agarwal, 2014), with both groups 
having a similar reduction in LV mass, the primary out -
come; of note, the group treated with atenolol had fewer 
deaths and heart failure hospitalizations, secondary 
outcomes for which the study was not powered. It is dif-
ficult to draw treatment conclusions from this study as 
the dosing intervals for lisinopril were very atypical for 
clinical practice. Several β-blockers, including atenolol, 
have markedly reduced elimination rates in kidney fail -
ure and should either not be used or be used at either 
a lower dose or increased dosing interval (Chapter 33). 
In general, non–kidney-metabolized β-blockers, such as 
metoprolol and carvedilol, can be safely titrated to heart 
rate and blood pressure. Dialysis clearance also varies for 
specific β-blockers, with atenolol and metoprolol both 
extensively cleared with high-flux hemodialysis while 
carvedilol and labetolol have minimal hemodialytic 
clearance.
c. Aldosterone blocking agents , including spironolactone and 
epleronone, are beneficial in the general population with 
heart failure and, given the known effects of aldosterone 
on arterial stiffness and cardiac remodeling, could be 
beneficial in the dialysis population. With only one small 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   726 09/10/14   1:46 am
727Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
trial suggesting a benefit on clinical outcomes with low-
dose spironolactone (Matsumoto, 2014), use of these 
agents has not been adequately studied in the dialysis 
population for safety or efficacy. Despite the lack of sub-
stantial kidney function, of theoretical concern would be 
a possible increased risk of hyperkalemia, particularly if 
aldosterone antagonists were used in conjunction with 
ACE inhibitors or ARBs.
d. Cardiac glycosides , namely digoxin, are frequently used 
in heart failure in the general population, where it has 
been shown that they improve morbidity but not mor -
tality. Digoxin, when used in dialysis patients, should 
be utilized judiciously with careful attention to dosage 
and drug levels. Maintenance dosing should begin at low 
doses (0.0625 mg or 0.125 mg) every other day. A loading 
dose generally should not be used. Care should be taken 
in complex drug regimens as many other medications 
affect digoxin levels.
2. Role of arteriovenous (AV) fistulas and grafts.  Although forearm 
fistulas occasionally lead to a high output state, this prob-
lem is more often encountered with upper arm high flow 
fistulas, and close attention to the size of the AV fistula is an 
essential part of longitudinal dialysis patient care. Brady -
cardia during fistula or graft occlusion (by finger pressure) 
suggests that the AV shunt is importantly and pathologi-
cally contributing to an increased cardiac output (Bran-
ham's sign). The test is specific, but absence of bradycardia 
on fistula or graft occlusion by no means exonerates the AV 
communication as a cause of the heart failure. Although 
limited data exist implicating fistulas in clinically appar -
ent heart failure, flow reduction procedures can be used 
to address potential concerns with high flow fistulas while 
maintaining fistula patency.
3. Carnitine. Predominantly anecdotal evidence has suggested 
cardiovascular benefits with l-carnitine therapy at recom-
mended intravenous doses of 20 mg/kg of total body weight 
following the dialysis procedure. Suggested indications for 
carnitine therapy have included anemia with extremely 
high erythropoietin requirements, intradialytic hypoten -
sion, and muscle weakness. l -carnitine has also been rec-
ommended for treatment of symptomatic cardiomyopathy 
with a documented impaired ejection fraction that has not 
responded adequately to standard medical therapy. Despite 
multiple suggested uses for l-carnitine, there are no strong 
data to support its utilization in dialysis at this time.
 V. PERICARDIAL DISEASE.  Pericardial disease most commonly mani-
fests as acute uremic or dialysis-associated pericarditis although 
chronic constrictive pericarditis may also be seen. Most esti-
mates of the clinical incidence of pericardial disease in prevalent 
dialysis patients are <20%.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   727 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
728
A. Uremic pericarditis. Uremic pericarditis describes patients who 
develop clinical manifestations of pericarditis prior to or 
within 8 weeks of initiation of kidney replacement therapy. 
In the current era, uremic pericarditis is rare, but remains an 
indication for and responds extremely well to initiation of kid-
ney replacement therapy.
B. Dialysis-associated pericarditis. Dialysis-associated pericarditis is a 
syndrome that occurs after a patient is stabilized on dialysis and 
is more common than uremic pericarditis. The etiology of dialy-
sis pericarditis remains unknown, but may be at least in part 
dependent on inadequate dialysis and volume overload. How-
ever, other causative factors are likely present, given that inten-
sification of dialysis frequently does not result in resolution.
1. Clinical manifestations and diagnosis. The most common symp-
tom of pericarditis is chest pain, generally pleuritic in 
nature exacerbated by reclining and reduced with leaning 
forward. Pericarditis may be accompanied by nonspecific 
symptoms, including fever, chills, malaise, dyspnea, and 
cough, with respiratory symptoms potentially reflecting 
a pericardial effusion. Physical examination may reveal a 
pericardial friction rub. When hemodynamically signifi -
cant, pericardial disease accompanied by an effusion may 
be characterized by hypotension, particularly during hemo-
dialysis. Jugular venous distension, elevated pulsus para-
doxus, and distant heart sounds may also be present. Chest 
radiograph may reveal an enlarged cardiac silhouette that 
may be difficult to distinguish from LVH.  Dialysis-related 
pericarditis often does not manifest with the classical 
electrocardiogram finding of diffuse ST segment elevation 
because there may only be minimal inflammation of the 
epicardium. Echocardiography is useful in identifying peri-
cardial effusions, but effusions may be absent in patients 
who have adhesive, noneffusive pericarditis.
2. T reatment
a. Monitoring. Small ( <100 mL), asymptomatic pericardial 
effusions are fairly common in dialysis patients and 
require no acute intervention. Larger effusions present 
a risk for tamponade and need to be monitored closely 
using serial echocardiograms. Hemodynamic and even 
echocardiographic signs of impending tamponade are 
not always reliable.
b. Intensification of hemodialysis  is the mainstay of therapy, 
but is only effective approximately 50% of the time. This 
may be accomplished by increasing dialysis frequency to 
5–7 days per week with careful attention to electrolytes, 
including phosphorus and magnesium, avoidance of 
over-alkalinization, and volume status. Heparin during 
dialysis has traditionally been avoided out of concern for 
hemorrhagic tamponade.
c. Adjuvant medical therapies , including oral and parenteral 
glucocorticoids and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   728 09/10/14   1:46 am
729Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
medications, have generally not been effective and are 
not indicated.
d. Surgical drainage. Failure to recognize the need for timely 
surgical drainage of large pericardial effusions may have 
dire consequences for the patient as the onset of tam-
ponade may be rapid and without premonitory signs. 
Hence, regular echocardiographic monitoring of the size 
of an effusion is vital. Surgical drainage by subxiphoid 
pericardiostomy should be strongly considered when -
ever the effusion size is estimated by echocardiography 
to exceed 250 mL (posterior echo-free space larger than 
1 cm) even when hemodynamic compromise is absent. 
Surgical drainage is mandatory when overt tampon-
ade appears. Subxiphoid pericardiostomy is the surgi-
cal drainage procedure of choice (i.e., insertion under 
local anesthesia of a large-bore tube into the pericardial 
space). The tube is left in place to closed drainage for 
several days until drainage ceases. Instillation of locally 
acting steroids has not been proven necessary and 
increases the risk of infection. Pericardiocentesis using 
a blindly inserted needle is dangerous and never indi-
cated except as an emergency therapy for patients with 
life-threatening tamponade. Pericardiocentesis is the 
most common method used for pericardial fluid removal 
and can be performed under fluoroscopic, echocardio -
graphic, or CT guidance. Of note, hemorrhagic effusions 
are poorly evacuable through the needle. Anterior peri-
cardiectomy has been favored by some, but general anes-
thesia and thoracotomy are unnecessary risks given the 
uniformly successful response to drainage by subxiphoid 
pericardiostomy.
C. Constrictive pericarditis.  Constrictive pericarditis can appear as 
an unusual complication of dialysis-associated pericarditis or 
as the first manifestation of pericardial disease. Constrictive 
pericarditis may also masquerade as congestive cardiac fail-
ure; the best means of differentiation is by right heart catheter-
ization. Even then, the diagnosis may be in doubt and can be 
proven only by a favorable response to total pericardiectomy.
D. Purulent pericarditis.  Occasionally, patients are found to have 
purulent pericarditis as a complication of septicemia, often as 
a result of access site infection. These patients often require 
anterior pericardiectomy in addition to antimicrobial therapy.
 VI. V ALVULAR DISEASE
A. Endocarditis. Infective endocarditis is a relatively common com-
plication of hemodialysis. Venous hemodialysis catheters are 
prone to infection and endocarditis is a frequent complication 
of catheter-related bacteremia; the presence of cardiovascular 
implantable electronic devices may also be associated with an 
increased risk of endocarditis. An additional recently appre-
ciated factor predisposing to endocarditis is cannulation 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   729 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
730
of AV fistulas using a buttonhole technique. Endocarditis is 
relatively common in dialysis patients even without the above 
risk factors. The majority of cases are due to gram-positive 
organisms ( S. aureus , S. epidermidis,  and Enterococcus ). The 
presence of underlying valvular disease including calcification 
may increase the risk. Prevention is focused on avoiding use 
of venous catheters as much as possible, prolonged antimi-
crobial therapy for staphylococcal bacteremia when it occurs, 
and reinforcement of proper vascular access technique, 
including exit site and cannulation site care. In many patients, 
acute bacterial endocarditis will complicate an already recog-
nized episode of Staphylococcus aureus or other gram-positive 
bacteremia, and these bacteremias should be treated as pre-
sumed endocarditis.
Bacteremia therapy consists of an antistaphylococcal 
agent (nafcillin or its equivalent for methicillin-sensitive S. 
aureus, or vancomycin for methicillin-resistant S. aureus) with 
or without an additional agent for synergistic therapy (e.g., 
gentamicin, rifampin) for at least 4–6 weeks. First generation 
cephalosporins that can be dosed at hemodialysis are some -
times used to avoid the need for additional vascular access, 
recognizing the ongoing infection risks associated with vas -
cular catheters as well as the need to preserve veins for AV fis-
tulas and grafts. Such prolonged antimicrobial therapy should 
help avoid the complication of valvular sequestration of infec-
tion in most patients with bacteremia diagnosed at an early 
stage.
1. Symptoms and signs. Dialysis patients with endocarditis usu-
ally, but not always, have fever. Murmurs, leukocytosis, and 
septic emboli may also be present; however, the clinical 
evaluation of murmurs may prove difficult because cardiac 
murmurs are common in the ordinary dialysis population 
owing to anemia, valvular calcification, and the presence 
of AV fistulas. Because a substantial percentage of dialysis 
patients are normally hypothermic, the body temperature 
with infection may be elevated to only slightly above the 
normal range or not at all.
2. Diagnosis is chiefly dependent on positive blood cultures 
and clinical suspicion. Transthoracic and, if echocardio -
graphy windows are limited, transesophageal echocardio -
graphy may be critical to making the diagnosis.
3. T reatment  of endocarditis in hemodialysis patients will 
 usually be directed at gram-positive organisms and regi-
mens should be tailored to bacterial sensitivities. In gen-
eral, empiric therapy in individuals with fever and a dialysis 
catheter will be initiated with vancomycin, because of both 
the high incidence of methicillin-resistant S. aureus  and 
the ease of administration. Some practitioners will add 
empiric gram-negative coverage with an aminoglycoside or 
third generation cephalosporin. In the presence of methi -
cillin-sensitive S. aureus , antistaphylococcal penicillins 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   730 09/10/14   1:46 am
731Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
like nafcillin or first generation cephalosporins like cefazo-
lin are preferable. In cases of severe S. aureus  infection, 
other agents may be added for synergy, including amino-
glycosides and rifampin. Care must be taken with amino-
glycoside use due to the incidence of ototoxicity. Newer 
antistaphylococcal agents such as daptomycin have been 
developed, but use should be judicious and aided by input 
from an infectious disease specialist to avoid development 
of widespread resistance. In all cases, there should be a 
high degree of suspicion for line and access infections, and 
a low threshold for removal of central venous catheters.
4. V alve replacement.  ESKD is not a contraindication to valve 
surgery. Indications for surgery are the same as in the gen-
eral population: progressive valvular destruction, progres-
sive heart failure, recurrent embolization, and failure to 
respond to appropriate antibiotic therapy. Based on USRDS 
data, in-hospital mortality following aortic or mitral valve 
replacement for bacterial endocarditis is approximately 
14%, and 6-month survival is approximately 60% and 
does not differ between tissue and prosthetic valves (Lei-
ther, 2013). Whether a role exists for transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement in the setting of endocarditis remains 
unknown, and the literature is currently limited to case 
reports in the general population.
 VII. V ALVULAR CALCIFICATION AND STENOSIS
A. Mitral annular calcification.  Mitral annular calcification may 
occur in as many as 50% of patients on dialysis and is also 
common in the elderly general population. It is recognized on 
echocardiography as a uniform echodense rigid band located 
near the base of the posterior mitral leaflet, and may progres-
sively involve the posterior leaflet. Complications include 
conduction abnormalities, embolic phenomena, mitral valve 
disease, and increased risk of endocarditis. There are no 
proven preventive or treatment strategies.
B. Aortic calcification and stenosis.  Aortic valve calcification occurs 
in 25%–55% of dialysis patients. Risk factors are similar to 
those for other forms of vascular calcification. Calcification 
may result in progressive immobilization of the aortic leaflets, 
eventually restricting flow. Functional aortic stenosis exists 
when the valve leaflets thicken to the extent that a pressure 
gradient develops across the aortic valve.
1. Symptoms and signs.  Angina, congestive heart failure, and 
syncope are the cardinal symptoms of critical aortic 
 stenosis. Frequent episodes of intradialytic hypotension 
may be a clue as the heart has difficulty in adapting to 
conditions of reduced filling. The classical systolic mur -
mur that radiates to the carotid arteries may be present; 
this typically begins after S1 and ceases prior to S2; addi-
tionally, S2 may be fixed or paradoxically split. However, 
it is often difficult to differentiate the murmur of aortic 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   731 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
732
stenosis from that heard in aortic sclerosis or from benign 
flow murmurs.
2. Diagnosis is by echocardiography and cardiac catheteriza -
tion, and mirrors diagnostic methods in the nondialysis 
population.
3. V alve replacement  is the therapy of choice. Timing depends 
on perceived risks versus anticipated benefits. Studies 
from the USRDS have not demonstrated any difference 
in survival based on the use of tissue versus nontissue 
bioprosthetic valves. The mortality rate for valve replace-
ment (with or without concurrent coronary artery bypass 
surgery) is relatively high for dialysis patients; however, in 
most cases, the prognosis is worse if clinically indicated 
surgery is not performed or if emergent surgery rather than 
elective surgery is performed. To date, several small case 
series have reported successful transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation procedures in dialysis patients, although dial-
ysis patients have been excluded from clinical trials assess-
ing this less invasive procedure.
 VIII. VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS, CARDIAC ARREST, AND SUDDEN  
CARDIAC DEATH
A. Risk factors. Many comorbid conditions that are highly preva -
lent in dialysis patients are also associated with arrhythmias. 
These include LVH, chamber enlargement, valve abnormali -
ties, and ischemic heart disease. Additionally, serum levels of 
cations that can affect cardiac conduction, including potas -
sium, calcium, hydrogen, and magnesium, are often abnormal 
and undergo rapid fluctuation during hemodialysis.
B. Cardiac arrest and acute arrhythmias.  Sudden cardiac death is 
common among dialysis patients, with rates of 49 per 1,000 
patient years in the hemodialysis population and 36 per 1,000 
patient years among PD patients. According to the 2013 
USRDS, cardiac arrest and arrhythmia account for ~25% of all 
deaths in dialysis patients. Thirty-day survival after cardiac 
arrest is only 32% and 1-year survival 15%. Potential strate-
gies to reduce the risk of fatal cardiac risk include careful 
attention to fluid and electrolyte shifts. The risk of arrhyth-
mias and cardiac arrest are increased in patients being dia-
lyzed using a dialysate potassium level of less than 3 mEq/L (3 
mM), and are most notable at lower potassium dialysate con-
centrations; it is the opinion of many nephrologists that low 
potassium dialysate (<2 meq/L [<2 mM]) should be avoided 
if possible. One recent study also suggested an increased risk 
of sudden death associated with use of a low dialysis solution 
calcium concentration, particularly in individuals with higher 
serum calcium levels. Finally, multiple studies demonstrate a 
higher risk of sudden death following the long interdialytic 
interval among patients treated with thrice-weekly hemodial-
ysis, further suggesting that electrolyte or volume abnormali-
ties may be complicit.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   732 09/10/14   1:46 am
733Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
For acute arrhythmias that occur during dialysis, the 
dialysis session should be terminated and blood returned cau-
tiously. Urgent cardioversion per advanced cardiac life support 
(ACLS) guidelines is indicated for all patients with an unstable 
rhythm, and all dialysis facilities should have automated exter-
nal defibrillators available and staff trained in their use. Amio-
darone, currently the first-line pharmacologic intervention 
for ventricular tachycardia in the general population, is dosed 
identically in dialysis patients. Airway management and car -
diac monitoring is essential. Administration of procainamide 
and other class Ia antiarrhythmics should be undertaken with 
caution as they may cause QT prolongation and torsades de 
pointes in dialysis patients.
Adequate data on the benefits of implantable cardioverter 
defibrillators (ICD) are lacking in dialysis patients. While, intu-
itively, given the high risk of ventricular arrhythmia, ICD use 
appears sensible, ICDs are associated with an increased risk of 
infection and central vein stenosis (Hickson, 2014).
C. Chronic arrhythmias
1. Atrial fibrillation  remains the most common arrhythmia in 
both the general and dialysis population, and often occurs 
in patients with structural heart disease and, in particular, 
left atrial enlargement. Prevalence estimates for paroxys -
mal and permanent atrial fibrillation are as high as 30% in 
individuals with advanced CKD, including dialysis patients.
a. Drug therapy . The benefits of rhythm versus rate control 
remain uncertain at this time. Several medications have 
traditionally been used for rate control in atrial fibrilla -
tion, including digoxin, β-blockers, nondihydropyridine 
calcium channel blockers and amiodarone. β-Blockers 
or nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers such 
as diltiazem are good choices for rate control in patients 
with intact systolic function, but may be contraindi-
cated in subjects with reduced cardiac function due to 
their negative inotropic effects. In these subjects, there 
clearly is a trade-off, as chronic control of tachycardia 
may offset any drug-related decrease in cardiac inotropy. 
Although a less effective agent for rate control, digoxin 
is frequently used in patients with reduced systolic func-
tion. Paradoxically, digoxin use is also associated with 
a high risk of arrhythmias. When digoxin is used in 
dialysis patients, extreme care must be taken to mini -
mize electrolyte shifts and, in particular, hypokalemia. 
These patients should generally be on a 3 mEq/L potas-
sium bath. Less alkaline dialysate may also be necessary 
to prevent potassium shifts. Amiodarone may be the 
drug of choice when rate control is not adequate with 
β-blockers or calcium channel blockers. Importantly, 
owing to drug interactions among warfarin, amioda -
rone, and digoxin, combinations of these drugs should 
be used with caution.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   733 09/10/14   1:46 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
734
b. Anticoagulation. The risks and benefits of warfarin therapy 
should be considered on an individual basis in all dialysis 
patients with chronic and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. 
There are no consistent data regarding anticoagulation 
for atrial fibrillation in the dialysis population. Recently, 
warfarin use has been linked to calciphylaxis in dialysis 
patients (warfarin skin necrosis and calciphylaxis have 
similar pathologic appearance). Warfarin is also associ -
ated with an increased risk of vascular calcification. The 
2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of 
Patients with Atrial Fibrillation states that it's reasonable 
to prescribe warfarin to hemodialysis patients with non-
valvular atrial fibrillation with a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 
2 or greater; implicit in the strength of the recommenda-
tion is that additional studies are needed to support this 
statement (January, 2014). These same guidelines are 
silent regarding warfarin use in PD patients.
2. V entricular arrhythmias and ectopy  are common in the dialysis 
population. There are no data indicating that cardiac man-
agement of patients prone to arrhythmia should be any 
different than in the general population. When indicated, 
dialysis patients may benefit from implantable defibrilla -
tors, although the cost–benefit of these devices remains 
uncertain given their unproven benefit in this popula-
tion and potential risks as described above. Amiodarone 
 therapy is generally well tolerated in dialysis patients, and 
dosing is identical to that in the general population.
 IX. STROKE. Cerebrovascular disease is also very common in individu-
als with CKD, with high incidence of both ischemic and hemor -
rhagic events. Even in the absence of clinically evident strokes, 
silent lesions and substantial brain white matter disease may 
be present. The presence of cardiovascular disease is associated 
with cerebrovascular manifestations in individuals with CKD, 
including worse cognitive function. As discussed above, given the 
frequency with which atrial fibrillation occurs in individuals with 
kidney failure, the use of warfarin and other anticoagulants for 
stroke prophylaxis in the dialysis population urgently requires 
an adequately powered clinical trial to inform optimal treatment 
decisions.
References and Suggested Readings
Agarwal R, et al. Hypertension in hemodialysis patients treated with atenolol or lisino-
pril: a randomized controlled trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014;29:672–681.
Charytan DM. How is the heart best protected in chronic dialysis patients?: between 
scylla and charybdis: what is the appropriate role for percutaneous coronary 
revascularization and coronary artery bypass grafting in patients on dialysis? 
Semin Dial. 2014;27:325–328.
Cice G, et al. Carvedilol increases two-year survival in dialysis patients with dilated 
cardiomyopathy: a prospective, placebo-controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2003;41:1438–1444.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   734 09/10/14   1:46 am
735Chapter 38 / Cardiovascular Disease
Cice G, et al. Effects of telmisartan added to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
on mortality and morbidity in hemodialysis patients with chronic heart failure a 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1701–1708.
deFilippi C, et al. Cardiac troponin T and C-reactive protein for predicting prognosis, 
coronary atherosclerosis, and cardiomyopathy in patients undergoing long-term 
hemodialysis. JAMA. 2003;290:353–359.
Goldfarb-Rumyantzev AS, et al. The association of lipid-modifying medications 
with mortality in patients on long-term peritoneal dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis . 
2007;50:791–802.
Herzog CA, et al. Clinical characteristics of dialysis patients with acute myocardial 
infarction in the United States: a collaborative project of the United States Renal 
Data System and the National Registry of Myocardial Infarction. Circulation. 
2007;116:1465–1472.
Hickson LJ, et al. Clinical presentation and outcomes of cardiovascular implant -
able electronic device infections in hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2014;64:104–110.
Inrig JK. Antihypertensive agents in hemodialysis patients: a current perspective. 
Semin Dial. 2010;23:290–297.
Iseki K, et al.; Olmesartan Clinical Trial in Okinawan Patients Under OKIDS (OCTO-
PUS) Group. Effects of angiotensin receptor blockade (ARB) on mortality and 
 cardiovascular outcomes in patients with long-term haemodialysis: a randomized 
controlled trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013;28:1579–1589.
January CT, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients 
With Atrial Fibrillation: Executive Summary: A Report of the American College 
of  Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and 
the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2014, in press.
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Lipid Work Group. KDIGO 
Clinical Practice Guideline for Lipid Management in Chronic Kidney Disease. 
Kidney Int. 2013;(suppl 3):259–305.
K/DOQI. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for cardiovascular disease in dialysis 
patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2005;45(suppl 3):S1–S153.
Kilpatrick RD, et al. Association between serum lipids and survival in hemodialysis 
patients and impact of race. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007;18:293–303.
Lau WL, Ix JH. Clinical detection, risk factors, and cardiovascular consequences of 
medial arterial calcification: a pattern of vascular injury associated with aberrant 
mineral metabolism. Semin Nephrol. 2013;33:93–105.
Leither MD, et al. Long-term survival of dialysis patients with bacterial endocardi -
tis undergoing valvular replacement surgery in the United States. Circulation . 
2013;128:344–351.
Matsumoto Y, et al. Spironolactone reduces cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
 morbidity and mortality in hemodialysis patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:  
528–36.
Miller M, et al. American Heart Association Clinical lipidology, thrombosis, and 
 prevention committee of the council on nutrition, physical activity, and metab -
olism; council on arteriosclerosis, thrombosis and vascular biology; council on 
cardiovascular nursing; council on the kidney in cardiovascular disease. Triglyc-
erides and cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2011;123:2292–333.
Ricks J, et al. Glycemic control and cardiovascular mortality in hemodialysis patients 
with diabetes: a 6-year cohort study. Diabetes. 2012;61:708–715.
Selby NM, et al. Dialysis-induced regional left ventricular dysfunction is ameliorated 
by cooling the dialysate. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006;1:1216–225.
Thygesen K, et al. Joint ESC/ACCF/AHA/WHF task force for Universal definition of 
myocardial infarction. Third universal definition of myocardial infarction. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:1581–1598.
Zannad F, et al. Prevention of cardiovascular events in end-stage renal disease: results 
of a randomized trial of fosinopril and implications for future studies. Kidney Int. 
2006;70:1318–1324.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch038.indd   735 09/10/14   1:46 am