736
39
In women with end stage kidney disease, fertility is decreased but the 
possibility of pregnancy is high enough that it needs to be prevented 
if not desired and managed carefully by a multidisciplinary team if 
it does occur. The hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian axis is deranged, 
contributing to decreased fertility, loss of libido, and abnormal uter -
ine bleeding.
 I. BIRTH CONTROL
A. Indications. Forty percent of women under the age of 55 treated 
with dialysis menstruate, but periods may be anovulatory or 
characterized by a shortened luteal phase (Holley, 1997). Infer-
tility is the rule, with pregnancy occurring in 0.3% to 1% per 
year in women aged 14–44. There is some suggestion that the 
use of erythropoietin and the increasing intensity of dialysis 
resulting from increased target Kt/V may have changed the 
hormonal abnormalities and other factors contributing to 
infertility in dialysis patients and that the frequency of preg -
nancy may have increased. A role for increased dialysis in 
increasing fertility is suggested by the experience of the noc-
turnal dialysis program at the University of Toronto, where, 
on average, women are receiving 36 hours of dialysis per 
week (Nadeau-Fredette, 2013). In this program, conception 
has occurred in 15% of women of childbearing age. Dialysis 
patients on standard dialysis regimens occasionally conceive, 
and when pregnancies occur, patient management is enor -
mously complicated. Birth control is advisable for women 
who do not wish to conceive. It is difficult to identify women 
at high risk for pregnancy. Women who become pregnant 
once on dialysis frequently conceive again. Women who have 
become pregnant with renal insufficiency prior to starting 
dialysis, and women with regular menses are at increased risk, 
but pregnancies have occurred in women treated with dialysis 
following years of amenorrhea.
B. Methods of contraception. Diaphragms and condoms can be used 
as in individuals with normal renal function. The incidence 
of pregnancy with barrier methods is as high as 25%–29% per 
year in normal women, but would be expected to be much 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 
in Dialysis Patients
Susan Hou and Susan Grossman
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   736 09/10/14   1:47 am
737Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
lower in dialysis patients. Many women may opt for more 
effective and less cumbersome methods of contraception. 
Oral contraceptives can be used but are contraindicated in 
women with a history of thrombophlebitis or severe hyper -
tension. Low-dose estrogen oral contraceptives can be used 
in patients with lupus who have no history of thrombosis or 
uncontrolled hypertension. Copper and levonorgesterone 
containing IUDs (intrauterine devices) can be used in women 
with diabetes, diabetes with nephropathy, systemic lupus ery-
thematosus, and multiple cardiovascular risk factors, and are 
good birth control methods for women both on hemodialysis 
(HD) and peritoneal dialysis (PD) . There are no guidelines 
from the U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use 
or from randomized controlled trials. There has been some 
concern that IUDs might increase the risk of peritonitis in 
women on PD, but this risk has not been well studied. There 
has also been concern without information on the effect of 
estrogen on access patency. The provision of estrogen offers 
the theoretical benefit of protecting bones from the effects of 
hypoestrogenemia seen in  dialysis patients.
Many women on dialysis have prolonged periods of 
anovulatory bleeding, associated with the unopposed effect 
of estrogen on the endometrium. Estrogen–progesterone 
cycling might reduce the risk of endometrial cancer that is 
associated with unopposed estrogen. Treatment of infertil-
ity has generally not been attempted because pregnancy is 
dangerous for the mother and the outcome is still poor. The 
exception is a switch to nocturnal dialysis with higher rates 
of conception.
 II. PREGNANCY
A. Frequency and outcome. Estimates of the frequency of pregnancy 
in women of childbearing age treated with dialysis range from 
a high of 1.4% per year in Saudi Arabia to 0.44% in Japan to 
a low of 0.3% per year in Belgium (Nadeau-Fredette, 2013). 
The  frequency of pregnancy in American women on dialysis 
is about 0.5% per year (Okundaye, 1998). For reasons that are 
unclear, conception occurs two to three times more frequently 
in hemodialysis patients than in PD patients. The likelihood of 
pregnancy in a dialysis patient resulting in a surviving infant, 
excluding elective abortions, is about 50%. The chances of 
success improve once she has reached the second trimester, 
and then it approaches 60%–70%. There is a further improve-
ment in outcome with intensive dialysis. For women who start 
dialysis after conception, the likelihood of having a surviving 
infant is 75%–80%. Of unsuccessful pregnancies, 68% result in 
spontaneous abortion, 13% in stillbirth, 16% in neonatal death 
and 3% in therapeutic abortion for life-threatening maternal 
problems. Approximately 40% of spontaneous abortions occur 
in the second trimester.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   737 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
738
B. Diagnosis. A high index of suspicion is required to make a 
timely diagnosis of pregnancy. Amenorrhea is common, and 
symptoms of early pregnancy such as nausea are often attrib-
uted to metabolic or gastrointestinal problems. A blood-
based pregnancy test (serum levels of the β subunit of HCG) 
should be done prior to radiographic studies for abdominal 
complaints. Urine pregnancy tests are not reliable even if the 
patient is not anuric. Even with blood tests, false positives and 
false negatives occur. The small amounts of HCG produced 
by somatic cells may be excreted slowly enough in renal fail-
ure for blood levels to be borderline positive for pregnancy. 
Occasionally, these borderline results have led to cancellation 
of elective surgery. During pregnancy, β-HCG levels are more 
elevated than expected for gestational age, so gestational age 
is best assessed by ultrasound. Failure to appreciate the high 
β-HCG levels has led to mistaken diagnosis of a hydatidiform 
mole and the mistaken belief that a pregnancy was not viable 
when no fetal heart beat was found when high levels of β-HCG 
led doctors to think the pregnancy was more advanced than 
it was (Potluri, 2011). The reasons for false negative tests are 
unclear. Similarly, serum tests of α-fetoprotein done to screen 
for Down's syndrome may be falsely elevated in pregnant dial-
ysis patients, and amniocentesis with karyotyping should be 
done to confirm abnormal results.
C. Management of hypertension during pregnancy. The major maternal 
risk associated with pregnancy in dialysis patients is severe 
hypertension. Eighty percent of pregnant dialysis patients have 
some degree of hypertension (BP >140/90 mm Hg). Forty per-
cent have severe hypertension with diastolic blood pressures 
greater than 110 mm Hg or systolic blood pressures greater 
than 180 mm Hg. Seventy-five percent of severe hypertension 
occurs before the third trimester. Intensive care unit admis -
sions for control of accelerated hypertension are required 
in 2% to 5% of pregnant dialysis patients. Patients should be 
taught to take their blood pressure on nondialysis days and 
report any increases in blood pressure promptly. Monitoring 
of blood pressure should continue for 6 weeks postpartum. 
Hypertension, even when severe, may not require the termina-
tion of pregnancy. The first step toward blood pressure control 
as in the nonpregnant patient is to make sure that the woman 
is euvolemic.
1. Drug therapy . If the blood pressure remains higher than 
140/90 mm Hg when the patient is euvolemic, there are 
several first line drugs than can be used safely, including 
α-methyldopa, labetalol, and calcium channel blockers. 
There is less experience with β-blockers and clonidine, 
but, with the exception of atenolol, these are probably safe. 
Hydralazine can be added to any of these first line drugs, 
but it does not work as a single agent when given orally. 
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angioten -
sin receptor blockers are contraindicated in pregnancy. In 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   738 09/10/14   1:47 am
739Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
animal studies, they have been associated with a fetal loss 
rate of 80%–93%. In humans, their use has been associated 
with an ossification defect in the skull, dysplastic kidneys, 
neonatal anuria, and death from hypoplastic lungs. One 
report that noted an increase in congenital anomalies with 
first trimester exposure to ACE inhibitors has driven prac -
tice away from first trimester use (Cooper, 2006) despite 
contradictory data in other studies.
2. Superimposed preeclampsia and hypertensive crisis.  Women 
treated with chronic dialysis are at increased risk for super-
imposed preeclampsia, but the diagnosis is difficult to 
make in the absence of findings of the HELLP (Hemolysis, 
Elevated Liver Enzymes, Low Platelets) syndrome such as 
thrombocytopenia, elevated liver enzymes, or microangio -
pathic hemolytic anemia.
There appears to be some benefit of low-dose aspirin 
in preventing preeclampsia in women at high risk for the 
disease. Although dialysis patients have not been specifi-
cally studied, they constitute an extremely high-risk group 
and can be given 75 mg daily of aspirin.
a. Antihypertensive drugs. Intravenous hydralazine is the drug 
of first choice for hypertensive crisis in pregnant women 
and should be given in doses of 5–10 mg every 20–30 
minutes. Labetalol is a good alternative. It can be given as 
a 20-mg bolus repeated every 30 minutes to a maximum 
of 220 mg or as a continuous infusion with 1 to 2 mg/min 
followed by 5–10 mg/hr to a maximum of 300 mg.
b. Magnesium. Magnesium is superior to other anticonvul -
sants for seizure prophylaxis in women with preeclamp-
sia, but it must be used with extreme caution in dialysis 
patients. A loading dose can be given safely. Additional 
magnesium should not be given until after dialysis or 
until after a drop in the serum magnesium level has been 
demonstrated. Magnesium potentiates the hypotensive 
effects of calcium channel blockers, and any calcium 
channel blocker should be stopped if magnesium is 
required.
D. Dialysis regimen during pregnancy
1. Dialysis modality . In direct comparisons of dialysis modali-
ties, there is no difference in outcome of pregnancy 
between hemodialysis patients and peritoneal dialysis 
patients, as measured by either infant survival or mean 
gestational age of live-born infants (Okundaye, 1998). How-
ever, it is easier to increase the amount of dialysis delivered 
with hemodialysis. The higher success rates reported in 
more recent studies have been achieved in hemodialysis 
patients. Although dialysis modality should not be changed 
because of pregnancy, it may be easier to start hemodi-
alysis in a pregnant woman than peritoneal. If peritoneal 
dialysis is elected, placement of a peritoneal catheter is 
possible at any stage of pregnancy, but immediate use and 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   739 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
740
increased intra-abdominal pressure may increase the risk 
of leaking around the catheter. There have been instances 
of mechanical problems with peritoneal catheters with 
changes in fetal position. Some nephrologists have elected 
to supplement peritoneal dialysis with hemodialysis when 
pregnancy is near term.
2. Intensive dialysis.  There is growing evidence that the 
 likelihood of a surviving infant is increased with intensive 
dialysis. The ideal number of hours of dialysis has not been 
established. There was a marked improvement in out -
comes for women dialyzed more than 20 hours per week, 
with a corresponding decrease in severe prematurity com-
pared with less intense regimens (Hou, 2010). Infant sur -
vival was 75% for pregnancies in the group dialyzed more 
than 20 hours a week compared with 33% and 44% for 
less intensively dialyzed groups. Mean gestational age for 
babies born to women dialyzed more than 20 hours a week 
was 34 weeks compared with 30 weeks in less intensively 
dialyzed women. Even better outcomes have been seen 
in women undergoing nocturnal hemodialysis 48 hours 
weekly with most infants surviving and born close to term 
(Nadeau-Fredette, 2013). In a comparison of pregnancy 
results in the United States versus Canada, there was a sug-
gestion of a “dose response” relationship between duration 
of weekly dialysis and pregnancy outcomes (Hladunewich, 
2014). There may be some amount of dialysis between 20 
and 48 hours a week that will lead to satisfactory outcomes. 
Daily dialysis decreases the fluid removal at each treat -
ment, decreasing the risk of hypotension during dialysis. 
Daily dialysis also allows the patient to eat a high-protein 
diet to ensure that the needs of pregnancy are met.
Increasing the intensity of dialysis in peritoneal dialy-
sis patients is difficult. Late in pregnancy, women have 
difficulty with severe abdominal distension, and exchange 
volume may have to be decreased. It becomes necessary to 
increase the frequency of exchanges even to maintain the 
same level of dialysis. A combination of frequent daytime 
exchanges and nighttime cycler is often necessary.
Some have raised the question whether increased 
 dialysis might have a detrimental effect by causing electrolyte 
abnormalities or by removing progesterone. Progesterone 
withdrawal plays a role in the initiation of labor. Measure-
ments of serum progesterone levels during dialysis in preg-
nant dialysis patients are variable. Brost and colleagues 
(1999) measured pre- and postdialysis progesterone levels in 
seven pregnant dialysis patients. Changes in serum proges-
terone ranged from a 52% decrease in levels to an 8% increase 
(Brost, 1999). Changes in serum progesterone were not asso-
ciated with changes in home uterine activity monitoring.
3. Dialysis solution calcium.  With the recognition of the risk of 
soft tissue calcification in long-term dialysis patients, a 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   740 09/10/14   1:47 am
741Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
2.25  mEq/L (1.125 mM) or 2.5 mEq/L (1.25 mM) calcium 
concentration has replaced 3.5 mEq/L (1.75 mM) as stan -
dard. When a bath containing 2.5 mEq/L (1.25 mM) is used, 
the patient is usually in positive calcium balance, averag-
ing about 200  mg/treatment. There is some production of 
calcitriol by the placenta that may increase serum calcium. 
Predialysis serum calcium levels should be checked weekly. 
The fetus needs 25 to 30 g of calcium for calcification of the 
fetal skeleton. With a 2.5 mEq/L (1.25 mM) bath, 25 weeks 
of dialysis should provide enough calcium, but premature 
birth is common enough, and calcium flux variable enough, 
that oral supplementation is advisable. If the woman 
requires phosphate binders, 1 to 2 g of elemental calcium 
should be sufficient. Over the long term, dialysate calcium 
should be low enough to minimize soft tissue calcification, 
but over the short term of pregnancy, calcium should be 
sufficient for the fetal skeleton. Skeletal abnormalities have 
been described in one baby born to a dialysis patient. For 
women who need phosphate binders, calcium-containing 
binders are the only group known to be safe in pregnancy. 
There is no experience with sevelamer or lanthanum car -
bonate in pregnancy. Lanthanum is neurotoxic in fetal mice.
Some women become hypophosphatemic. Often, 
phosphate binders are no longer required, and it may be 
necessary to add phosphorus to the bath (e.g., 4 mg/dL 
[1.3 mM] phosphorus or higher). For women who do not 
need phosphate binders, calcium can be provided in a 
lower dose separate from meals. Experience with cinacal-
cet in pregnancy is limited to a few case reports of use in 
primary hyperparathyroidism. Serum calcium and phos -
phorus should be monitored weekly. Hypercalcemia may 
suppress the fetal parathyroid glands and cause neonatal 
tetany.
4. Dialysis solution bicarbonate.  With a standard bath, daily 
dialysis carries a theoretical risk of alkalosis. Metabolic 
alkalosis carries an increased risk in pregnant women who 
have a concurrent respiratory alkalosis; however, in the 
few instances where arterial blood gases have been done, 
compensatory hypercapnia has occurred in women with 
severe metabolic alkalosis. Serum bicarbonate in normal 
pregnancy is 18–20 mmol/L. A 25 mM bicarbonate dialy -
sis bath is usually effective in avoiding alkalosis. When this 
bicarbonate concentration is not available, bicarbonate 
can be removed by increasing ultrafiltration and replacing 
the losses with saline.
5. Dialysis solution sodium. Normal serum sodium is decreased 
during pregnancy to approximately 134 mmol/L. Since 
thirst is normal, the pregnant woman will take in enough 
water to normalize serum sodium if it is high at the end of 
dialysis. With daily dialysis, fluid removal should be modest 
enough to make sodium modeling unnecessary.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   741 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
742
6. Monitoring weight gain. Determination of optimal postdialysis 
weight is problematic in pregnant dialysis patients. Rec-
ommended weight gain for women who become pregnant 
at their ideal body weight is 11.5–16 kg. Only 1.6 kg of this 
weight gain occurs in the first trimester. During pregnancy, 
there is a 50% increase in blood volume, but vasodilatation 
normally prevents the development of hypertension. There 
is some evidence that blood volume does not increase 
appropriately in pregnant women with renal insufficiency, 
but blood volume has not been studied in pregnant dialysis 
patients.
In early pregnancy, it may become difficult to dialyze 
the patient down to her prepregnancy dry weight, but the 
change should be only 0.9 to 2.3 kg, depending on the pre-
pregnancy body mass index (BMI). Recommended weight 
gain in the second and third trimesters is between 0.3 and 
0.5 kg per week, again depending on the prepregnancy 
BMI. While the nutritionist in the dialysis unit can provide 
dietary guidelines for appropriate weight gain during preg-
nancy, the most pressing question for the dialysis unit staff  
is determining how much of the weight change between 
treatments is excess fluid and how much is part of the 
desired pregnancy-associated weight gain.
With daily dialysis, fluid gain between treatments 
should be small, but the majority of the day-to-day change 
in weight is still usually fluid. The woman should have a 
careful weekly examination to look for signs of fluid over -
load. With daily dialysis, volume-related hypertension 
should be minimized, and if there is any increase in blood 
pressure, particularly during dialysis, the patient should be 
evaluated for preeclampsia.
7. Heparinization. Clotting of the extracorporeal circuit or the 
dialysis access occurs frequently during pregnancy. Hepa -
rin does not cross the placenta, and unless there is vaginal 
bleeding, it is not necessary to lower the dose.
E. Management of anemia. Anemia in pregnant women is associated 
with premature birth and low birth weight. The hemoglobin 
level at which anemia contributes to these problems is not 
well established. Dialysis patients who become pregnant usu -
ally experience worsening anemia. Plasma volume increases 
while red cell mass, which increases in normal pregnancy, is 
limited by erythropoietin dose. While target hemoglobin levels 
for nonpregnant dialysis patients have decreased, a target for 
pregnancy has not been clearly established. However, we would 
choose a target of 10–11 g/dL (100–110 g/L) until more data are 
available, based on the World Health Organization's definition of 
anemia in pregnancy as a hemoglobin of 11 g/dL (110 g/L) or less.
1. Erythropoiesis stimulating agents (ESA).  It has become usual 
practice to continue erythropoietin during pregnancy. 
Prior to the availability of erythropoietin, transfusion was 
usually needed in any pregnancy that progressed beyond 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   742 09/10/14   1:47 am
743Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
the first trimester. All ESAs available are listed by the USA 
as being in “category C” in pregnancy (FDA pregnancy drug 
risk categories are A, B, C, D, and X, with X being the highest 
risk). Congenital anomalies have not been reported in the 
infants of the small number of women who took erythropoi-
etin during organogenesis. In animals, congenital anomalies 
have been seen, but only at doses of 500 units/kg. Recom-
binant erythropoietin does not cross the  placenta, but it 
is not known whether darbepoetin crosses the placenta. 
There are a few case reports of the use of darbepoetin in 
pregnancy without problems. Erythropoietin has been asso-
ciated with hypertension in nonpregnant patients, but it is 
difficult to determine what factors influence hypertension 
during pregnancy. Women treated with erythropoietin prior 
to pregnancy require increased doses  during pregnancy. The 
hematocrit has usually dropped by the time the pregnancy 
is recognized. We recommend increasing the dose of eryth-
ropoietin by 25% until the  target hemoglobin is reached.
2. Iron therapy . While the effects of pharmacologic doses 
of erythropoietin stimulating agents on the fetus are 
unknown, there is a little known downside to treating iron 
deficiency. Pregnancy in normal women requires 700–1150 
mg of iron. Daily hemodialysis increases iron losses over the 
usual amounts. We have found an increase in iron require-
ments during pregnancy and have given intravenous iron, 
but because of the high rate of transfer to the fetus, espe-
cially after 30 weeks' gestation, we limit individual doses 
to 62.5 mg. The FDA has labeled ferric gluconate and iron 
sucrose category B risk for pregnancy.
3. Folate. Folate requirements are increased in normal preg -
nant women. Folate deficiency is associated with an 
increase in neural tube defects. Folate losses increase with 
intensive dialysis, and folate supplementation should be 
quadrupled.
 III. LABOR AND DELIVER Y . Eighty percent of infants born to dialy -
sis patients are premature. Reasons for prematurity include 
 premature labor, maternal hypertension, and fetal distress, with 
premature labor being the most common.
Efforts to prevent premature labor include serial measure -
ments of cervical length and in some cases cerclage. Progester -
one has been used in other settings to prevent premature labor, 
and although it has not been used in dialysis patients, their risk 
of premature labor is so high that they should be considered 
 candidates for its use.
Premature labor in dialysis patients has been successfully 
treated with terbutaline, magnesium, nifedipine, and indometha-
cin. Magnesium has been given intravenously in hemodialysis 
patients and has been added to the peritoneal dialysis solution 
in peritoneal dialysis patients. Magnesium must be used with 
 extreme care in women with renal failure. Blood levels should be 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   743 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
744
monitored frequently. A loading dose can be given, but additional 
doses should be given only after dialysis and when the level is low. 
The use of magnesium in combination with nifedipine should be 
avoided because the combination can cause profound hypoten-
sion. Indomethacin has also been used with success, but patients 
must be monitored for oligohydramnios, and the fetus must be 
monitored for right heart dilatation. Indomethacin can be used 
only for a short time. While all tocolytics (a tocolytic is an an-
ticontraction medication used to repress labor) are used for a 
short time, premature labor frequently recurs, and repeated use 
of indomethacin is problematic. In women with residual kidney 
function, indomethacin use may result in further deterioration in 
glomerular filtration rate and the need for increased dialysis.
Infants of dialysis patients are frequently small for gesta -
tional age, but it is not clear whether their growth restriction is 
the result of uremic toxins per se  or of maternal hypertension . 
Decreased intrauterine growth restriction in nocturnal dialysis 
patients suggests a role for accumulated uremic toxins. There is 
an increased risk of stillbirth in dialysis patients, and antenatal 
monitoring should be started as soon as there is a chance of sur -
vival outside the mother (26 weeks).
In PD patients, caesarian section can be done extraperito-
neally, leaving the catheter in place, and PD can be resumed 24 
hours after delivery, starting with small exchange volumes and 
increasing over a 48-hour period. If there is leakage from the inci-
sion, the patient can be hemodialyzed for 2–4 weeks.
Even a normal appearing infant should be monitored in a 
high-risk nursery. At birth, the infant, whose kidneys are normal 
for gestational age, will have a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and se-
rum creatinine levels similar to the mother's, and the infant will 
experience a solute diuresis, requiring careful monitoring of elec-
trolytes and volume status.
There does not appear to be any increased risk of congeni-
tal anomalies, but information on growth and development is 
sketchy.
 I V. DYSP AREUNIA.  Some women dialysis patients may experience dys-
pareunia because of estrogen deficiency and resulting vaginal dry-
ness. Postmenopausal women experiencing these symptoms can 
be prescribed either a conjugated estrogen cream, a sustained-
release intravaginal estrogen ring or a vaginal low-dose estrogen 
tablet. Typical doses for local estrogen are one estradiol tablet, 10 
mcg, inserted intravaginally once a day for 7 days, and then two or 
three times a week. A vaginal ring containing 2 mg of estradiol can 
be inserted and then replaced every 3 months. Conjugated estro-
gen cream can be used; the usual dose is 0.5 g per day for 21 days 
on, then 7 days off. An alternative regimen is to apply the cream 
twice weekly. Estrogen cream has been associated with more 
side effects, for example, breast tenderness, vaginal bleeding, 
and perineal pain. The North American Menopause Society does 
not recommend use of progestogen in women treated with local 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   744 09/10/14   1:47 am
745Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
estrogen therapies. Oral estrogen is rarely  necessary in dialysis 
patients, and when needed, a daily dose of 0.3 mg of conjugated 
estrogen and 2.5 mg of medroxyprogesterone provides enough 
estrogen to prevent dyspareunia since estrogen is metabolized 
more slowly in dialysis patients. If there is breakthrough bleeding 
on this combination, progesterone can be increased to 5 mg.
 V. SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
A. Incidence and etiology . Fifty percent of female dialysis patients 
under the age of 55 are sexually active. A majority of women 
on dialysis experience some sexual dysfunction. They suf-
fer both decreased libido and decreased ability to achieve 
orgasm. Treatment with erythropoietin  appears to be associ-
ated with an improvement in sexual function, but most of the 
data collected have been in men. Various reasons for sexual 
 dysfunction have been proposed, including hyperprolac-
tinemia, gonadal dysfunction, depression, hyperparathyroid -
ism, and change in body image.
B. Hyperprolactinemia. Studies from 30 years ago reported hyper -
prolactinemia in 75%–90% of female dialysis patients. The 
mean serum prolactin levels in women with sexual dysfunc-
tion are higher than in patients with normal sexual function. 
While prolactin levels have not been formally reevaluated, 
informal observation suggests that the frequency of hyperp -
rolactinemia has decreased. Treatment of hyperprolactinemia 
with the dopamine agonist bromergocriptine has been 
reported (in limited uncontrolled studies) to improve sexual 
function in both men and women on dialysis. It has not come 
into widespread use because hemodialysis patients may be 
particularly susceptible to the hypotensive effects of this drug. 
When correctable physical problems cannot be found, dialysis 
patients should be referred for sex therapy, as would patients 
without renal failure.
 VI. ABNORMAL UTERINE BLEEDING. In 2011, the International Federation 
of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) developed new terminology 
for what was previously called “Dysfunctional Uterine Bleeding, ” 
and the term Abnormal Uterine Bleeding is now preferred.
A. Incidence Many women develop amenorrhea when the 
 glomerular filtration rate falls to less than 10 mL/min. Men-
struation returns in as many as 60% once dialysis is started. 
Regular menstruation has become more common in premeno-
pausal women with end stage kidney  disease (ESKD ) than it 
was in the early days of dialysis; however, over half of women 
with ESKD who menstruate report hypermenorrhea. Women 
on HD and those on PD report similar menstrual abnor -
malities. Approximately 60% of those who menstruate have 
irregular cycles. Abnormal uterine bleeding is common and 
is of concern because it may be an early sign of endometrial 
cancer. Blood loss may lead to severe anemia even in women 
treated with erythropoietin, although the introduction of 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   745 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
746
erythropoietin has made the management of abnormal uter -
ine bleeding substantially easier.
B. Management
1. Screening for malignancy . Management depends on age and 
therefore risk for carcinoma. There is some suggestion 
that women on hemodialysis may be more likely to have 
endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma compared with 
women without renal disease, so a high index of suspicion 
is warranted.
a. W omen older than 40 years of age  who have abnormal uterine 
bleeding should have endometrial sampling. In general, 
endometrial biopsy done in the office has replaced dila -
tation & curettage, because there is excellent correlation 
between the histopathology of endometrial specimens 
taken by biopsy in the office and D&C (dilatation and 
curettage) performed in the operating room. If the endo-
metrial biopsy is nondiagnostic, or bleeding persists 
after a negative biopsy, further diagnostic testing should 
be done.
b. W omen younger than 40 years.  The cancer risk is relatively 
small, and a yearly Papanicolaou smear is usually suffi-
cient to screen for malignancy.
2. Anticoagulation. The lowest possible dosage of heparin 
should be used to perform hemodialysis when a woman 
is menstruating. Heparin-free techniques are described in 
Chapter 14.
3. Bloody peritoneal fluid during peritoneal dialysis . During men -
struation or ovulation, the peritoneal fluid can become 
bloody (Lew, 2007). There is no specific management, 
except  perhaps to avoid addition of heparin to the 
 peritoneal dialysis solution. In some cases, frank hemo -
peritoneum may occur, requiring suppression of ovulation 
(Harnett, 1987). An aseptic peritonitis picture during men-
struation or ovulation has also been reported (Poole, 1987). 
Bloody peritoneal fluid frequently occurs after gynecologic 
procedures.
4. Management of anemia.  Anemia should be managed with 
erythropoietin, as in other dialysis patients. Heavy uterine 
bleeding will result in increased iron requirements, and 
additional intravenous iron may have to be given.
5. Hormonal therapy. Given the evidence that hormonal replace-
ment therapy may increase the incidence of cardiovascu-
lar events, and the excess cardiovascular mortality among 
women with ESKD , the risks associated with hormone 
replacement therapy may outweigh the benefits (see 
 discussion below.)
a. Intrauterine delivery of progesterone in the form of levo-
norgestrel intrauterine system  (Mirena) is probably 
the safest therapy and first line treatment for patients 
on hemodialysis who are experiencing abnormal uter -
ine bleeding. Once the intrauterine device has been 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   746 09/10/14   1:47 am
747Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
implanted, scanty menstruation should develop within 
3 months. Peritonitis has been reported after place-
ment of IUDs in patients on PD, so these patients should 
receive prophylaxis prior to insertion of the IUD. (Ameri-
can College of Cardiology guidelines do not recommend 
antibiotic prophylaxis prior to IUD insertion to prevent 
endocarditis.) This system is highly effective and in the 
vast majority of cases will obviate the need for systemic 
hormonal therapy.
b. Oral contraceptives would be a second line treatment, but  
they should be avoided if blood pressure control or risk 
of thrombotic disease is a problem. The theoretical ben -
efits of using estrogen progesterone combinations to 
prevent uterine cancer and osteoporosis have been dis -
cussed above.
c. Medroxypogesterone acetate (Depo-Provera).  Progesterone 
can be given either intramuscularly as Depo-Provera 
100 mg once a week for 4 weeks or orally as 10 mg daily 
for the first 10 days of the menstrual cycle. This drug is 
best reserved for patients with chronic hypermenorrhea 
who do not respond to more conservative intrauterine 
or oral hormonal therapy. Because many patients on 
dialysis have a bleeding tendency, IM injections on a 
regular basis are undesirable. Moreover, the half-life of 
IM medroxyprogesterone acetate in dialysis patients 
is unpredictable. Progestins work best in the setting of 
anovulatory bleeding.
d. Gonadotropin releasing hormone agonists.  These can be given 
as an intramuscular injection once a month (leupro-
lide acetate) or a daily intranasal dose. These drugs are 
extremely expensive and should be reserved for patients 
who continue to have excessive menstrual bleeding 
and who do not respond to intrauterine progesterone, 
oral  contraceptives, or progestins. There is one report 
of ovarian hyperstimulation in a patient on chronic 
dialysis who received two doses of leuprolide acetate 
(Hampton, 1991).
e. High-dosage intravenous estrogens . In the case of acute 
excessive blood loss, high dose estrogen therapy can be 
used, giving 25 mg of conjugated estrogens IV every 6 
hours. Bleeding usually subsides within 12 hours.
f. Deamino arginine vasopressin (DDA VP). In a setting of acute 
blood loss when bleeding time is prolonged, DDAVP 
should be given in a dosage of 0.3 pg/kg in 50 mL of saline 
every 4–8 hours for three to four doses.
6. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents  have been shown to be 
effective in women who ovulate. These agents may be less 
effective in the setting of ESKD because of the increased 
incidence of anovulatory cycles in women with ESKD Also, 
women with end stage kidney  disease are at increased risk 
for gastrointestinal complications.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   747 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
748
7. Endometrial ablation. Endometrial ablation can be performed 
by several surgical techniques: hysteroscopic endometrial 
ablation with laser, photocoagulation, roller ball, or loop 
resection. Patients are pretreated with either danazol or 
gonadotropin releasing hormone for 3–4 weeks before the 
procedure to thin the endometrium. The procedure leads 
to permanent infertility.
8. Hysterectomy. For postmenopausal women with significant 
dysfunctional uterine bleeding, hysterectomy may be the 
approach of choice. Laparoscopic hysterectomy is now 
an option and for leiomyomata too large for laparoscopic 
surgery, gonadotropin releasing hormones can be given to 
reduce the size of fibroids enough to make laparoscopic 
hysterectomy possible. The proposed operation should be 
carefully discussed with the patient, and concomitant med-
ical problems and the risks of surgery should be taken into 
consideration. With the advent of endometrial ablation 
with laser, hysterectomy will now probably be reserved for 
women who have bleeding secondary to uterine fibroids 
or to other uterine or pelvic pathology that in itself war -
rants the surgery. Hysterectomy should be done only as a 
life-saving procedure in a premenopausal woman who is a 
candidate for renal transplantation because the latter will 
frequently restore fertility.
 VII. HORMONE REPLACEMENT THERAPY . Women with end stage kidney  
disease treated with dialysis experience menopause on average 
5 years earlier than women without renal failure. The role of hor-
mone replacement therapy (HRT) in dialysis patients has never 
been clear. About 10% of postmenopausal women on dialysis 
take HRT. Most report that HRT was started before the initiation 
of dialysis. Of women not taking hormone replacement therapy, 
a majority say they would not take HRT if advised to do so by 
their doctors. Recent evidence of the risk of HRT raises concern 
about its use in ESKD  patients. The Women's Health Initiative 
Study demonstrated an increased risk of breast cancer, pulmo -
nary embolism, deep vein thrombophlebitis, and of coronary and 
cerebrovascular disease after long-term replacement of estro-
gen and progesterone in normal postmenopausal women. The 
only health advantage for women in the treatment group was in 
reduced fractures.
Women with ESKD  have more than a 20-fold increased 
incidence of cardiovascular disease compared with women 
without ESKD while multifactorial bone disease is also more 
common and more severe in dialysis patients. The risk of hip 
fracture is higher in dialysis patients than in healthy people 
of the same age and sex. When young women on dialysis who 
have regular menses are compared with young women with 
amenorrhea, the group with amenorrhea has a significantly 
lower bone mineral density. Raloxifine 60 mg daily has been 
used successfully to prevent bone loss in postmenopausal 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   748 09/10/14   1:47 am
749Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
estrogen-deficient dialysis patients, and this drug provides a 
safe alternative to HRT.
The use of HRT should be limited to the relief of symptoms 
of estrogen deficiency that cannot be relieved by other treat -
ments. Only the patient can decide the importance of relieving 
these symptoms after understanding the risks. The increased risk 
of cardiovascular disease and breast cancer in healthy women 
taking HRT was small enough that many women have continued 
them. Unfortunately, the specific risk of HRT in hemodialysis 
patients has not been determined, and we can only extrapolate 
from the data in healthy women and women with preexisting 
heart disease in advising patients of the risk.
It is still the general practice to treat women with premature 
ovarian failure or early surgical menopause with HRT. It may be 
difficult to know whether a woman is postmenopausal since even 
women with FSH and LH in the postmenopausal range may have 
normalization after transplant. A very small study (13 patients) 
found an improvement in sexual function and general well-being 
as well as an improvement in L2-L4 bone density in premeno-
pausal dialysis patients taking HRT.
HRT is contraindicated in women with active liver disease 
and deep vein thrombophlebitis. Estrogen may make lupus flares 
more likely and may worsen hepatic cystic disease in women with 
polycystic kidney disease.
If HRT is prescribed, the dose should be adjusted in women 
on dialysis. Estrogen levels increase more in dialysis patients than 
in normal controls when estrogen is administered. If oral HRT is 
given to dialysis patients, the dose used should be about half of 
what would be given to a woman without renal failure. Transder-
mal estrogen may have less effect on clotting factors than oral 
estrogen.
 VIII. GYNECOLOGIC NEOPLASMS
A. Benign. Uterine fibroids, or leiomyomata, are extremely com-
mon, occurring in as many as 80% of women over the age of 30, 
with approximately 25% of them being symptomatic. There is 
no information about their incidence in chronic renal failure. 
Uterine fibroids usually present with either menometrorrha-
gia or symptoms related to the enlarging uterus pressing on 
nearby organs, that is, pain, pressure, and constipation. Small, 
asymptomatic leiomyomata can be managed with observation. 
Indications for therapy include symptomatic bleeding, pain or 
pressure, urinary retention, torsion, degeneration with acute 
abdominal pain, prolapse through the cervix, and increase in 
the size after menopause. Women still in the childbearing age 
range who are potential candidates for transplant should have 
myomectomy performed rather than hysterectomy if that is 
surgically feasible, to preserve childbearing potential. Recently, 
a number of treatments other than hysterectomy have become 
available, including medical therapy with mifepristone (RU486, 
an abortifacient), gonadotropin releasing hormone agonists, 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   749 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
750
laparoscopic myomectomy, myolysis, and uterine artery 
embolization. Laparoscopic myomectomy should not be done 
in women who plan childbearing because of the increased risk 
of uterine rupture when pregnancy occurs.
B. Screening. Women treated with dialysis are less likely to get reg-
ular mammograms and pap smears than women in the gen-
eral population. The incidence of cervical cancer is increased 
in women with ESKD , while the incidence of breast cancer is 
similar to women without kidney disease. Several recent stud-
ies suggest that screening for malignancies in women with 
end stage kidney  disease results in a negligible increase in 
life expectancy because of the shortened survival of women 
with end stage kidney  disease. Such an outlook does not 
allow for the possibility that great strides will be made in the 
care of ESKD  patients leading to prolonged survival. Young 
women, women awaiting transplantation, and women with 
increased risk for breast, ovarian, and cervical cancer should 
be screened. Women with the highest risk for cervical cancer 
include women who have been treated with immunosup-
pressive therapy or who are currently on immunosuppressive 
therapy, either for previous transplant or for their underlying 
disease, or women with AIDS. These women should have pap 
smears performed every year.
C. Evaluation of cancer in women who are symptomatic.  Endome -
trial cancer usually presents as abnormal uterine bleeding, 
the investigation and management of which was discussed 
above. Ovarian cancer usually presents with vague abdominal 
symptoms and later as an ovarian mass. Abdominal discom-
fort, nausea, and weight loss induced by ovarian cancer may 
initially be misinterpreted as symptoms of uremia or under -
dialysis. In patients on PD, ovarian cancer may present as 
bloody peritoneal fluid, an abnormal peritoneal cell count, or 
a change in the color of the fluid. A high index of suspicion 
is necessary to detect ovarian cancer at an early and poten-
tially curable stage. The use of CA125 (cancer antigen 125) to 
screen for or follow ovarian cancer is of limited value in dialy-
sis patients. It is not efficiently removed by dialysis and is also 
produced by mesothelial cells, giving rise to elevated levels, 
especially in PD patients.
D. Diagnostic procedures
1. Lower gastrointestinal X-ray series.  When performing a lower 
gastrointestinal X-ray examination, the amount of water 
used to dilute the contrast material can be diluted to one-
fourth the normal amount.
2. Computed tomography. Intravenous contrast infusion, if 
needed to perform a CT scan or angiography, is not contra-
indicated in dialysis patients. Although the administration 
of contrast involves increasing intravascular volume and 
osmolality, immediate dialysis following the study can be 
performed in the rare instance of symptoms. Dialysis can 
be done the following day if she is asymptomatic. A patient 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   750 09/10/14   1:47 am
751Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
on peritoneal dialysis requiring an abdominal CT scan 
should present for the examination with dialysis fluid in 
the abdomen.
3. Pelvic and abdominal ultrasonography. The patient on peritoneal 
dialysis with a suspected pelvic or ovarian lesion should 
undergo ultrasound scanning of the involved area. In those 
instances where pelvic pathologic changes cannot be visu-
alized without distending the bladder, the bladder can be 
filled via a Foley catheter.
4. T ransvaginal ultrasound.  It is possible to delineate pelvic 
abnormalities more clearly using transvaginal ultrasound, 
because of the proximity of the probe to the pelvic organs 
and the relatively thin vaginal vault, which enables the use 
of higher sound frequencies and therefore higher resolu-
tion. On the other hand, a transabdominal probe will give 
a more panoramic view of the pelvis, showing the interre-
lationship of the major anatomic structures in the pelvic 
organs and their possible pathology. A transvaginal probe 
is able to furnish a more focused image of the organ of 
interest, but only permits effective imaging to no more than 
7–10 cm in depth.
Unlike transabdominal pelvic ultrasound, it is best for 
the patient to have the transvaginal ultrasound study done 
while her bladder is empty. Since many patients on dialysis 
are not able to fill their bladders unless a Foley catheter is in 
place and fluid instilled into the bladder, it makes sense to 
first perform a transvaginal ultrasound if pelvic pathology 
is suspected and proceed to transabdominal pelvic sono -
gram if the information needed cannot be obtained with 
the transvaginal approach. PD patients should have the 
abdomen full for transabdominal ultrasound and empty 
for transvaginal ultrasound.
5. Magnetic Resonance Imaging. For women who are on PD, MRI 
of the peritoneal cavity can be done without any contrast, 
using the dialysate as contrast medium. This makes MRI of 
the abdomen and pelvic region the best modality to evalu-
ate potential anatomic abnormalities in women on PD. Use 
of gadolinium as a contrast agent to enhance MRI should 
be done only after considering the very serious poten -
tial risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. There is some 
evidence that with poststudy dialysis the risk of neph-
rogenic  systemic fibrosis is not as high as once thought 
(Amet, 2014).
E. Management. The management of gynecologic cancers and 
nonmalignant tumors in women with chronic renal failure 
includes surgical excision and chemotherapy.
1. Surgery .  In PD patients, any gynecologic procedure more 
invasive than a PAP smear (e.g., endometrial or cervical 
cone biopsy) should be performed with an empty perito -
neal cavity. The patient should receive prophylactic antibi-
otics as described below.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   751 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
752
In patients with peritoneal catheters undergoing 
pelvic or abdominal operations, we leave the catheter in 
place unless there is bacterial contamination of the peri -
toneal cavity. When there is a low but measurable risk of 
peritoneal contamination as in a vaginal hysterectomy, we 
administer 1.0 g of vancomycin hydrochloride and 1.0 g 
of cefoxitin prophylactically IV just prior to surgery. If the 
patient is known to be colonized with Pseudomonas, tobra-
mycin 2.0 mg/kg IV should be added to the prophylactic 
regimen. Postoperatively, the catheter is irrigated with 500 
mL of peritoneal dialysis solution three times daily to main-
tain patency. Irrigations are decreased to once daily when 
the fluid is no longer bloody. We wait 10 days to 2 weeks 
before using the catheter again, maintaining the patient by 
hemodialysis during the interim.
2. Chemotherapy. Use of chemotherapeutic agents in dialysis 
patients is beyond the scope of this Handbook.
References and Suggested Readings
Amet S, et al. Incidence of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in patients undergoing dialy-
sis after contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium-based 
contrast agents: the Prospective Fibrose Nephrogénique Systémique study. Invest 
Radiol. 2014;49:109–115.
Ansari N, et al. Gynaecologic Nephrology. Am Med J. 2013;3:147–160.
Barua M, et al. Successful pregnancies on nocturnal home hemodialysis. Clin J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2008;3:392–396.
Brost BC, et al. Effect of hemodialysis on serum progesterone level in pregnant women. 
Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;33:917–919.
Cooper WO, et al. Major congenital malformations after first-trimester exposure to 
ACE inhibitors. N Eng J Med. 2006;354:2443–2451.
Dimitriadis C, Bargman J.  Gynecologic issues in peritoneal dialysis. Adv Perit Dial. 
2011;27:101–105.
Hampton HL, Whitworth NS, Cowan BD. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist 
(leuprolide acetate) induced ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome in a woman 
undergoing intermittent hemodialysis. Fertil Steril. 1991;55:429.
Harnett JD, et al. Recurrent hemoperitoneum in women receiving continuous ambula-
tory peritoneal dialysis. Ann Intern Med. 1987;107:341.
Hladunewich MA, et al. Intensive hemodialysis associates with improved pregnancy 
outcomes: a Canadian and United States cohort comparison. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2014;25:1103–1109.
Holley JL, et al. Gynecologic and reproductive issues in women on dialysis. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 1997;29:685–690.
Holley JL. Screening, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer in long-term dialysis patients. 
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007;2:604–610.
Hou S. Daily dialysis in pregnancy. Hemodial Int. 2004;8:167–171.
Hou S. Pregnancy in women treated with dialysis: lessons from a large series over 
20 years. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;56:5–6.
Kajbaf S, Nichol G, Zimmerman D. Cancer screening and life expectancy of Canadian 
patients with kidney failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2002;17:1786–1789.
Kramer HM, Curhan GC, Singh A. Permanent cessation of menses and post meno-
pausal hormone use in dialysis dependent women. Am J Kidney Dis . 2003;41:  
643–650.
Lew SQ. Hemoperitoneum: bloody peritoneal dialysiate in ESRD receiving peritoneal 
dialysis. Perit Dial Int. 2007;27:226–233.
Lin HF, et al. Increased risk of cancer in chronic dialysis patients: a population based 
cohort study in Taiwan. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:1585–1590.
Ma TL, Wang CL, Hwang JC. Recurrent peritonitis episodes in a continuous ambu-
latory peritoneal dialysis patient after gynecologic procedures. Perit Dial Int . 
2012;32:113–114.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   752 09/10/14   1:47 am
753Chapter 39 / Obstetrics and Gynecology in Dialysis Patients
Mattix H, Singh AK. Estrogen replacement therapy: implications for post menopausal 
women with end-stage renal disease. Curr Opin Nephrol. 2000;9:207–214.
Nadeau-Fredette AC, et al. End-stage renal disease and pregnancy. Adv Chronic Kidney 
Dis. 2013;20:246–252.
Nakamura Y, Yoshimura Y. Treatment of uterine leiomyomas in perimenopausal  
women with gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists. In: Pitkin RM, Scott JR, 
ed. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 36: 9/93
Navaneethan SD, et al. Prevalence and correlates of self reported sexual dysfunction 
in CKD: a metaanalysis of observational studies. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;56:670–685.
Okundaye IB, Abrinko P , Hou S. A Registry for Pregnancy in Dialysis Patients. Am  
J Kidney Dis. 1998;31:766–773.
Poole CL et al. Aseptic peritonitis associated with menstruation and ovulation in 
a peritoneal dialysis patient. In: Khanna R, et al. eds. Advances in Continuous 
 Ambulatory Peritoneal Dialysis. Toronto: Peritoneal Dialysis Bulletin; 1987.
Potluri K, et al. Beta HCG in a pregnant dialysis patient: a cautionary tale. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant Plus. 2011;4:42–43.
Shan HY, et al. Use of circulating antiangiogenic factors to differentiate other hyper -
tensive disorders from preeclampsia in a pregnant woman on dialysis. Am J Kidney 
Dis. 2008;51:1029–1032.
Stengel B. Chronic kidney disease and cancer: a troubling Connection. J Nephrol. 
2010;23:253–262.
Strippoli GFM, et al. Sexual dysfunction in women with ESRD requiring hemodialysis. 
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7:974–981.
Weisbord SD. Female sexual dysfunction in ESRD: an underappreciated epidemic? Clin 
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7:881.
Web References
National Collaborating Center for Women's and Children's Health. Hypertension 
in pregnancy: the management of hypertensive disorders during pregnancy. 
CG107 Hypertension in pregnancy: full guideline, http://www.nice.org.uk/  
guidance/CG107. Accessed July 7, 2014.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch039.indd   753 09/10/14   1:47 am