754
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients are subject to a wide vari-
ety of pathophysiologic processes that challenge the structural and 
functional integrity of both central and peripheral nervous systems. 
 Neurologic dysfunction can be episodic or chronic and can reflect a 
wide range of humoral, metabolic, inflammatory, and vascular in-
sults. These may be attendant to the underlying conditions that have 
led to end stage kidney disease (ESKD), advanced uremia itself, or to 
the dialysis procedure (on a variety of levels). The integrated product 
of these factors contributes to neurocognitive performance, depres-
sion, health-related quality of life, and the ability of the patient to 
tolerate the dialysis procedure whilst leading  a full and independent 
life in the hours spent not actually receiving dialysis. This chapter is 
limited to discussion of the brain and peripheral nervous system, and  
encompasses sleep disorders and combination pathologies such as 
restless legs syndrome.
 I. CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM.  W hen considering dysfunction of the 
central nervous system (CNS) in the dialyzed uremic patient, it’s 
important to consider the range of structural abnormalities that 
can occur, as well as the impact of the uremic milieu. Many of 
these considerations are often present together and may result in 
compound effects.
A. Intracranial bleeding and ischemic stroke.  Spontaneous subdural 
hemorrhage is common. The rate has been increasing over 
recent years, possibly associated with increased use of antico-
agulation in patients with atrial fibrillation in an attempt to 
reduce the risk of stroke. Intracranial or subarachnoid bleeds 
are not uncommon (even during the dialysis procedure itself). 
They are a particular problem in  patients with polycystic kid-
neys who may have intracranial aneurysms. Headache occurs 
in both disequilibrium and early cerebral hemorrhage, but the 
pattern of recovery is different and new onset headache may 
need to be investigated for possible intracranial bleeding by CT 
or MRI (embracing the limitations of contrast use in this popu-
lation). Heparin-free dialysis should be used. Both ischemic 
and  hemorrhagic strokes are common and catastrophic events, 
but usually present little diagnostic challenge. Both short- and 
Nervous System  
and Sleep Disorders
Christopher W. McIntyre40
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   754 09/10/14   1:47 am
755Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
long-term management are controversial with there being very 
little data relating to the application of intracerebral throm -
bolysis or  primary/secondary preventative measures in hemo-
dialysis patients. The efficacy and safety profile of all of these 
interventions may very well be very different in dialysis  pa -
tients compared with the general population, where they were 
developed.
B. Subclinical brain structural abnormalities.  There are several 
 pathologies detectable by brain MRI in the brain  of dialysis 
patients. These may be entirely asymptomatic or linked to 
more subtle defects in neurocognitive function, often only ap-
parent on specific testing. They are often progressive. Many of 
these changes do not appear to be associated with classical 
cardiovascular risk factors, and instead seem to be predomi-
nantly driven by other factors such as microvascular disease, 
inflammation, and challenged perfusion (both in general and 
episodically during hemodialysis). These abnormalities range 
from silent cerebral infarct to changes both in the white mat -
ter (leukoaraiosis) and grey matter (cortical atrophy).
1. Silent cerebral infarcts.  Nakatani and coworkers examined 
the hypothesis that hemodialysis patients develop silent 
cerebral infarcts (SCI). These silent infarcts are mainly sub-
cortical and lacunar without causing any neurologic deficit, 
but are thought to be a risk factor for developing symptom-
atic infarct or hemorrhagic strokes. Nakatani and cowork -
ers (2003) examined a group of 50 hemodialysis patients 
and found that in those who developed SCI, associated risk 
factors were smoking, lower HDL cholesterol, higher uric 
acid levels, and higher levels of hepatocyte growth factor. 
 Echocardiographically, the group who developed SCI had 
higher interventricular septal thickness at the end of diastole, 
higher posterior wall thickness at the end of diastole, and 
higher left ventricular mass index. On  24-hour blood pres-
sure monitoring, the group with silent infarcts was not more 
hypertensive in general, but did not evidence the healthy 
pattern of a nocturnal fall in blood pressure. One possible 
mechanism in the causation of SCI might be microbubbles 
generated during the hemodialysis procedure and unde -
tected by the air alarms may find their ways into the cerebral 
circulation and cause ischemic damage (Forsberg, 2010).
2. Cerebral atrophy. Cerebral (cortical) atrophy has been iden -
tified in hemodialysis patients through both CT and MRI-
based studies. The degree of cerebral atrophy is associated 
with duration of dialysis. Cerebral blood flow is lower in 
between dialysis sessions and higher during hemodialy-
sis. These hemodynamic changes and changes in cerebral 
oxygenation are less pronounced in peritoneal dialysis pa -
tients, suggesting that there may be iatrogenic cerebral ef-
fects of hemodialysis (Prohovnik, 2007).
3. Leukoaraiosis. Leukoaraiosis describes nonspecific changes 
in the brain white matter caused by loss of axons and 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   755 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
756
myelin. This is usually associated with ischemic injury. 
The MRI appearance is that of high signal intensity on T2-
weighted images. Leukoaraiosis is a risk factor for devel-
oping dementia, mobility problems, and strokes, and has 
been described in the literature primarily as an age-related 
phenomenon. In the non-CKD population, leukoaraiosis is 
associated with reduction in cognitive function and with 
increased prevalence and severity of depression.
Several studies have identified this pattern of struc -
tural brain injury as being common in hemodialysis pa-
tients; in fact, a universal finding after only 3 months of 
hemodialysis. The severity of reduction in cognitive func-
tion was proportional to the distribution and amount of 
white matter injury, and in turn this was proportional to 
the degree of cardiovascular instability during hemodialy -
sis sessions (Eldehini, 2014).
C. Humoral abnormalities influencing brain function
1. Uremic encephalopathy . Encephalopathy is a cardinal fea -
ture of untreated uremia. Initial manifestations are subtle: 
flattened affect, irritability, and poor rapport with others. 
Formal evaluation at this stage may reveal patchy cogni -
tive or psychomotor behavior. Event-related brain poten-
tials (stimulus-evoked averaged electroencephalogram 
[EEG] waveforms) may be abnormal. As uremia advances, 
lassitude gives way to disorientation, confusion, delirium, 
stupor, and, preterminally, coma. There are accompany -
ing motor disturbances: tremulousness, myoclonus, and 
asterixis ( flapping tremor). These major signs of uremic 
encephalopathy will reliably regress within a week or so of 
initiation of regular dialysis; failure to do so should lead to 
an alternative or additional diagnosis.
2. Metabolic and electrolytic causes.  Hypercalcemia from any 
cause (often relating to CKD mineral bone disorder or its 
treatments) can present as an acute confusional state or 
coma. Severe low or high serum sodium levels can also re-
sult in a predominantly neurologic presentation. The pres-
ence of cerebral atrophy often makes the dialysis patient 
remarkably resistant to the development of severe cerebral 
edema as a result of abnormal tonicity. Hypoglycemia may 
present in diabetic patients due to inappropriate hypogly -
cemic therapy, or to further reductions in residual renal 
function with reduced insulin metabolism. In nondiabetic 
patients hypoglycemia may occur as a result of reflex hy-
perinsulinemia after exposure to hemodialysis solutions 
containing higher glucose concentrations, or as a hypogly -
cemic response to glucose-free dialysate.
Acute aluminum intoxication can present with an 
acute neurotoxicity syndrome characterized by agita-
tion, confusion, seizures, myoclonic jerks, and coma. This 
is quite uncommon now compared with the bygone era 
when there were less stringent water treatment  standards 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   756 09/10/14   1:47 am
757Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
and heavy reliance on aluminum-  containing salts for 
oral binding of phosphate. Still, even today, the acute 
syndrome can be seen when dialysis solution becomes 
highly contaminated with aluminum for some reason, or 
in the course of deferoxamine therapy. In this setting, the 
plasma aluminum level is usually more than 500 mcg/L  
(19 mcmol/L), and typical EEG changes (multifocal bursts of 
slow or delta wave activity, often accompanied by spikes) are 
present. More information about aluminum toxicity is given 
in Chapter 36 on mineral bone disorders.
3. Infection and inflammation.  Both systemic and local infection 
and inflammation can affect the brain in dialysis patients. 
Sepsis in this patient group not uncommonly presents 
without a typical pyrexial response (especially in the el-
derly), and the initial manifestation can be central obtun -
dation. Dialysis patients are immunosuppressed both as 
a consequence of the uremic state and of immunomodu-
latory therapy given as part of treatment of their underly-
ing disease. They also  are at higher risk of a wide range of 
encephalitic or meningitic processes, especially those with 
more “slow burning” presentations such as tuberculous 
meningitis.
Endotoxemia is another important factor that could 
be implicated in the pathogenesis of hemodialysis-induced 
brain injury. Endotoxemia is well described in CKD5D pa-
tients, and it induces a systemic proinflammatory state 
(McIntyre, 2011). These patients suffer gut hypoperfusion 
and increased bowel permeability, resulting in bacterial 
and endotoxin translocation to the circulation. The level of 
resultant circulatory stress is associated with the severity of 
endotoxemia. Hemodialysis patients are in a chronic state 
of endotoxemia, with acute exacerbations from recurrent 
mesenteric ischemia accompanying each hemodialysis ses-
sion. The repeated endotoxemic insult may also aggravate 
the effects of hemodialysis on cerebral perfusion with sec-
ondary ischemic white matter subcortical brain injury.
D. Acute episodic dysfunction
1. Disequilibrium syndrome . Rapid correction of advanced ure-
mia is sometimes complicated by a characteristic syn-
drome of neurologic dysfunction appearing in the last part 
of dialysis or shortly afterward. Hemodialysis is usually in-
volved, but disequilibrium can also occur with peritoneal 
dialysis. In its mildest form, the syndrome is limited to 
restlessness, headache, nausea, and vomiting; more severe 
manifestations include confusion and major seizures. The 
syndrome is believed to be caused by brain swelling due to 
a lag in osmolar shifts between blood and brain during dial-
ysis, but changes in brain pH may also play a role. Disequi-
librium occurs in a major form in previously undialyzed 
patients, but minor features may complicate chronic ther -
apy. Disequilibrium is more likely to occur when patients 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   757 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
758
with advanced states of uremia are dialyzed for excessive 
lengths of time during their first treatment sessions, espe-
cially in the era of using higher-efficiency dialyzers in this 
setting. The initial dialyses should be relatively short, so as 
to reduce elevated serum urea levels slowly over the course 
of several days. The routine use of anticonvulsants in this 
setting should be avoided.
2. Other factors effecting tonicity. Rapid shifting of other osmoti-
cally active substances (glucose and sodium) may also 
contribute to presentation with acute obtundation, and 
further consideration may need to be given to glucose level 
correction and careful individualization of dialysate con -
ductivity to minimize these additional insults.
3. Dialysis-induced reduction in cerebral perfusion/oxygenation. Failure  
to maintain blood pressure during dialysis may also pre -
cipitate an acute reduction in consciousness levels. Diag-
nosis and management of intradialytic hypotension is dealt 
with in more detail in other sections of this handbook, but 
immediate recognition and corrective measures are essen-
tial to restore normal functioning and reduce the risk of a 
watershed area cerebral infarct. Such episodes may also 
be important in driving chronic subclinical white matter 
injury.
4. Coning. Uncal and cerebellar tonsillar herniation can occur 
without other coexisting pathologic lesions. This can pres-
ent with a severe dialysis-induced headache and a reduced 
level of consciousness, and result in death. More commonly, 
this presentation occurs in the setting of either inherited 
abnormalities predisposing to coning (such as the so-called 
Chiari malformation, where there is partial hindbrain hernia-
tion through the foramen magnum, sometimes seen in spina 
bifida) or after neurosurgery. Cerebrospinal fluid diversion 
and, in particular, shunt malfunction can also increase the 
risk of dialysis-induced brainstem herniation. Limitation of 
ultrafiltration rate and careful matching of dialysate tonicity 
to plasma are the essentials of management in this setting.
5. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus . Status epilepticus  may 
present with confusion or more severe reductions in the 
level of consciousness. When occurring without obvious 
convulsive activity (Iftikhar, 2007), it may mimic collapse 
from either a catastrophic intracerebral event (although 
with normal brain imaging) or acute cardiovascular 
insufficiency.
Typically, the EEG in nonconvulsive status epilepticus 
shows generalized spike-and-wave complexes at 3 Hz or re-
petitive generalized or focal spikes, sharp-waves, and spike-
and-wave complexes at > 4/sec. Events that can precipitate 
nonconvulsive status include alcohol, drug withdrawal, in-
fection, hypoxia, cerebrovascular accident, menstruation, 
cyclosporine A therapy, malignancy, and antibiotic neu -
rotoxicity. Antibiotics which have been reported to cause 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   758 09/10/14   1:47 am
759Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
seizures in patients with decreased renal function, include 
penicillins, cephalosporins, imipenem/cilastatin, and qui-
nolones. Management is focused on dealing with precipitat-
ing causes and use of standard anticonvulsant drugs for the 
management of acute epilepsy.
E. Differential diagnosis of acute obtundation syndrome, dialysis disequi-
librium, and chronic dementia. T he differential diagnosis for each 
of these conditions is large. A partial list to consider when 
confronted with a patient with acute obtundation is given 
in  Table  40.1. Mimics of dialysis disequilibrium are given in 
 Table  40.2, and those for chronic dementia in Table 40.3. Pro-
posed management strategies for acute obtundation are shown 
in Figure 40.1 and for chronic obtundation in Figure 40.2.
F. Diagnosis and management of epileptic seizures
1. Etiology. Seizures are not uncommon in dialysis patients. 
Generalized seizures are an integral feature of advanced 
uremic encephalopathy. Seizures can also be a manifesta -
tion of severe disequilibrium syndrome, as discussed above. 
Table 40.4 lists the most common associated conditions. 
Intracranial hemorrhage commonly leads to focal seizures, 
while most of the other causes lead to generalized seizures.
Seizures characterize both aluminum-induced enceph-
alopathy and severe hypertension. In children with renal 
failure, the incidence of seizures is higher than in adults. Pre-
dialysis hypocalcemia can result in seizures during or soon 
after dialysis because of the fall in serum ionized calcium 
level associated with rapid correction of acidosis. As in any 
Uremic encephalopathy
Drug intoxication (by drugs renally excreted)
Antibiotics
Antiviral agents
Opiates
Anticonvulsants
Central nervous system infection
Meningitis
Encephalitis
Endocarditis
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Hemorrhage
Subarachnoid
Subdural
Intracranial
Acute aluminum toxicity (coingestion of citrate, highly contaminated dialysate)
Wernicke’s encephalopathy (in patients with vomiting, poor food intake)
Partial Differential Diagnoses of Acute Obtundation in 
 Maintenance Dialysis patients40.1
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   759 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
760
Intracranial bleeding
Subdural
Subarachnoid
Intracranial
Metabolic disorders
Hyperosmolar states
Hypercalcemia
Hypoglycemia
Hyponatremia
Cerebral infarction
Hypotension
Excessive ultrafiltration
Cardiac arrhythmia
Myocardial infarction
Anaphylaxis
Aluminum intoxication (subacute)
Conditions That May Mimic Dialysis Disequilibrium 
Syndrome40.2
TABLE
Idiopathic presenile dementia
Vascular dementia
Depression
Chronic subdural hematoma
Drug intoxication
Metabolic disorders
Hypercalcemia (autonomous hyperparathyroidism or iatrogenic)
Hypoglycemic brain damage
Demyelination syndrome secondary to hyponatremia
Uremia (underdialysis)
Hydrocephalus (possibly secondary to subarachnoid hemorrhage)
Anemia
Thiamine deficiency (chronic Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome)
Chronic infection
Aluminum encephalopathy (dialysis dementia)
Partial Differential Diagnoses of Chronic Dementia in 
 Dialysis Patients40.3
TABLE
patient with hypocalcemia, associated (and often causal) 
hypomagnesemia should be excluded. Hypoglycemia can 
occur if glucose-free dialysis solution is used.
Seizures tend to be more common in patients taking a 
variety of “epileptogenic” drugs. Penicillins and cephalospo-
rins are common offenders, especially if high doses are given 
or when  provision for dose reduction in the setting of CKD 
has not been made. A selection of other epileptogenic drugs 
is given in Table 40.4. A variety of poisonings in dialysis pa-
tients can also present with seizures, including star fruit in-
gestion (numbness, weakness, obtundation, seizures). Some 
anticonvulsant drugs may have enhanced removal by high-
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   760 09/10/14   1:47 am
761Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
FIGURE 40.1 Evaluation and Management of Acute Obtundation.
Acute hypotension
– Electrocardiogram
– Serial troponin
Exclude
Arrhythmia
Acute myocardial infarction
Massive pulmonary embolism
Acute obtundation
Sudden reduction in level of consciousness
during hemodialysis session
Assess hemodynamic status
Hemodynamically stable
NoYes
Consider 1° or 2°
epileptic seizure
Neuroimaging
– Epileptic
 seizure
 (See other
 diagnostic
 pathway)
? Convulsive
activity
Urea ↑↑
Urgent blood assessment of
urea and electrolyte
AbnormalNormal
Metabolic
– Disequlib.
– ↓ Glucose
– ↓ Total Calcium
– ↓ iCalcium (2° to
 acidosis correction)
– Acute hypo or
 hypernatremia
Consider
drugs
– Recreational
 drugs
– Opiates
– Antibiotics
– Anticonvulsants
– Dialysis
 procedure
 related
– Uremia
 2° access
 malfunction
– Dialysis
 circuit
 malfunction
Stroke
± Intracerebral
 hemorrhage
Extradural
Coning
Hydrocephalus
Abnormal Normal
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   761 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
762
FIGURE 40.2 Evaluation and management of chronic obtundation. DSM 5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition.
Chronic obtundation
↓ Cognitive function
– Objective confirmation
Neuroimaging
Abnormal Normal
No YesDepression
screening
Formal
DSM 5
assessment
Blood count Urea &
Electrolytes
MetabolicAnemia
↓ Calcium
↓ Glucose
Thiamine deficiency
Reconsider Aluminum neurotoxicity
Drugs
– Check levels 
or withdraw 
where appropriate
– Pregabalin
– Gabapentin
– Psych. medication
– Antivirals
– Antibiotics
– Opioids
Hydrocephalus
Demyelination
– Multiple sclerosis, etc.
– Hyponatremia
Chronic
subdural
Cortical/subcortical
abnormalities
– Multi-infarct/vascular dementia
– Leukoaraiosis
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   762 09/10/14   1:47 am
763Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
Etiology
Disequilibrium syndrome
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Intracranial hemorrhage
Drug-induced reduction in fit threshold
Alcohol withdrawal
Metabolic
Hypoglycemia
Hypocalcemia
Hyperosmolality due to peritoneal dialysis
Hypernatremia (accidental due to hemodialysis machine malfunction) 
or hyponatremia
Severe hypotension
Anoxia
Arrhythmia
Uremic encephalopathy (unlikely in dialysis patients)
Toxins (star fruit ingestion)
Anaphylaxis
Aluminum encephalopathy
Air embolism
Prevention
Identification of susceptible subgroups
Predialysis serum urea nitrogen level >130 mg/dL (46 mmol/L)
Severe hypertension
Previous seizure disorder
Alcoholism
Predialysis hypocalcemia (<6 mg/dL, 1.5 mmol/L) with acidosis
Limiting initial dialysis session blood flow rate, length and ultrafiltration rate
Maintenance of dialysis solution sodium concentration at or above plasma level
Use of 3.5 mEq/L (1.75 mM) or 4.0 mEq/L (2.0 mM) calcium bath in hypocalcemic 
patients; administration of IV calcium during dialysis if necessary
Scrupulous attention to blood pressure control during EPO therapy
Limiting exposure to ethanol and to “epileptogenic” drugs
Penicillins
Fluoroquinolones
Cyclosporine
Meperidine (Demerol)
Theophylline
Metoclopramide
Lithium
Therapy
Stopping dialysis
Maintenance of airway patency
Drawing blood for glucose, calcium, and other electrolytes
If hypoglycemia is suspected, administration of IV glucose
Administration of IV diazepam or lorazepam, and also phenytoin if required
Treatment of metabolic disturbance if present
Seizures in Dialysis Patients
40.4
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   763 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
764
efficiency hemodialysis (e.g., carbamazepine) and this may 
result in precipitation of seizures due to reduction of drug 
plasma levels below the therapeutic threshold.
2. Diagnosis. Electroencephalography is of somewhat limited
value in the evaluation of seizures in dialysis patients. Pa-
tients with renal failure rarely have a normal EEG, the most 
common abnormal findings being reduced voltage, loss of
alpha activity, and the appearance of periodic, symmetric,
and usually frontal, delta wave slowing. In any case, the
EEG is unlikely to distinguish between the various causes
of seizures listed in Table 40.4, and a search for aluminum
poisoning, an underlying metabolic cause, a complication
of the dialysis procedure, or a structural intracranial lesion 
is important not to neglect.
3. Prevention. Susceptible patients can often be identified (see
Table 40.4). The prevention of dialysis disequilibrium has
already been discussed. Patients with low serum ionized
calcium levels can be given intravenous calcium at the
start of dialysis, and a dialysis solution with a higher cal-
cium concentration can be used. Blood pressure needs to
be carefully regulated.
4. Management. One suggested algorithm is shown in Fig-
ure  40.3. The emergency treatment of convulsions should
 begin by stopping dialysis and ensuring patency of the  airway. 
Blood should be sampled immediately and serum  glucose,
 calcium, and other electrolyte values determined. IV  glucose 
should be administered if hypoglycemia is  suspected. If
seizures persist, benzodiazepines are  appropriate drugs
for initial use. Further management of refractory  seizure
activity needs to be performed with appropriate full
monitoring of the cardiovascular status of the patient in
a 
 higher- dependency clinical area. Additional agents can
be utilized. Phenytoin is effective, but must be used with
caution and appropriate monitoring of cardiac rhythm.  
A loading dosage of phenytoin, 10–15 mg/kg, can be given by 
slow IV infusion at a rate no greater than 50 mg/min, during
constant electrocardiographic monitoring to guard against 
phenytoin-induced bradycardia, atrioventricular conduc-
tion block, or other arrhythmias. Other agents that may be
appropriate include IV valproate.
5. Drug prophylaxis.  The prophylaxis of recurrent convulsions
is usually effective with administration of phenytoin, car -
bamazepine, or sodium valproate. Fits relating to dialysis
encephalopathy respond best to benzodiazepines, particu-
larly clonazepam.
a. Phenytoin. Phenytoin absorption is slow and erratic. Its
hepatic metabolism is concentration dependent and
saturable, and distribution and elimination vary. Phe-
nytoin protein binding is decreased and the distribution 
volume increased in renal failure. With any given total
serum phenytoin level, the concentration of active, free
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   764 09/10/14   1:47 am
765Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
FIGURE 40.3 Evaluation and management of seizures.
Seizures Witnessed convulsive activity during dialysis
Hypotensive
Hypertensive
(Typically > 200/100)
Hypertensive
Encephalopathy
Hemodynamically stable
Neuroimaging
NormalA bnormal
Blood Biochemistry
NormalAbnormal
Drugs and Toxicology
Acute intracerebral
event
Acute metabolic
derangement
Disequilibrium
Hypoglycemia
Hypocalcemia
Aluminum
encephalopathy
Anaphylactic
response
– Drugs
– Dialysis
Drugs of Abuse
– Analgesics
– Antibiotics
– Antiviral
– Overdose of  
 Antiarrythmics
 Anticonvulsants
– Antiemetics
Cardiovascular
Cause
ECG
Enzymes
Computed
tomography
Pulmonary
angiogram
Pulmonary
embolism
1° Cardiac
– Arrythmias
– Acute MI
– Acute 
   coronary
   syndrome
EEGHemodynamic
assessment ±
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   765 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
766
drug is higher in uremic patients than in patients with 
normal renal function. Most clinical laboratories mea-
sure the total serum drug concentration, and a low to-
tal phenytoin level in a patient with renal failure should 
not be misinterpreted as subtherapeutic. Physical find -
ings such as nystagmus may be helpful in deciding not 
to increase the dose. Seizures are also a manifestation of 
phenytoin excess, and small dosage increases may result 
in disproportionately large increases in the serum drug 
level. Dose increments should be small, sufficient time 
should be allowed for the patient to reach steady-state 
drug levels, and measurement of free serum phenytoin 
concentration should be done frequently in uremic pa -
tients who are not responding to therapy.
b. Other agents.  O ther newer anticonvulsants may also be 
suitable (with less risk of sedation, wider therapeutic 
windows, or as part of multiple drug regimes). Dialysis 
clearance of many of these drugs has not been subjected 
to rigorous patient-based evaluation. This is especially 
true when managing acute kidney injury and adding 
in alternative dialysis/CRRT (continuous renal replace-
ment therapy) schedules. Reference to up-to-date dose 
modification guidelines and sources is strongly recom-
mended. Table 40.5 is provided as initial guidance to 
some of the therapeutic challenges posed utilizing this 
group of drugs in dialysis patients.
Carbamazepine, ethosuximide, and valproic acid 
can be given in 75%–100% of the usual dosage to dialysis 
patients. Protein binding of valproic acid may be reduced 
in uremia. Carbamazepine is not well removed by dialysis. 
Valproic acid is dialyzable when high-flux dialyzers are 
used. Ethosuximide is substantially dialyzable, and a post-
hemodialysis supplement may be required. Primidone is 
40% renally excreted and is moderately dialyzable. Primi-
done should be used with extreme caution in dialysis pa-
tients; the need for a substantially reduced dosage should 
be anticipated, and a posthemodialysis supplement may 
be required. Phenobarbital can be given in 75%–100% of 
the usual dosage. Phenobarbital is dialyzable, and a dose 
should be scheduled after the dialysis treatment. Viga-
batrin, a γ -aminobutyric acid-transaminase inhibitor, is 
eliminated by the kidney; major dosage reduction is nec-
essary in dialysis patients (see Table 40.5).
G. Chronic neurologic states
1. Neurocognitive decline and dementia. Reduced cortical function 
and dementia is common in dialysis patients, with charac-
teristic patterns of memory loss and impaired cognition. 
This is in part due to a predominantly elderly population 
with a high burden of comorbid conditions, and all of the 
recognized risk factors for the development of dementia. 
Widespread atheromatous plaques are found commonly 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   766 09/10/14   1:47 am
767Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
Drug Renal Excre-
tion (%)
Nonuremic Dosage 
Range (mg/d)
Usual Dosage for 
ESKD Patients (% of 
nonuremic dose)
Plasma Half-life (hr)
Nonuremic 
Patients
ESKD Patients Removed by 
Hemodialysis
Notes
Carbamazepine 3 600–1,600 100 10–20 Same a No NU-TPL = 4–12 mg/L
Clonazepam <1 0.5–20.0 100 17–28 Same a No
Diazepam <1 5–10 (IV)b ?50 20–70 Same a No Active metabolites may 
accumulate in renal failure
Ethosuximide >30 750–2,000 100 50–60 Same a Yes NU-TPL = 40–100 mg/L
Phenobarbital 10–40 60–200 75 100 120–160 Yes
Phenytoin <5 300–600 100 10–30 Same a ± NU-TPL = 10–20 mg/L
ESKD-TPL = 4–10 mg/L due to 
decreased protein binding
Primidone 40 c 500–2,000 Caution 5–15 Same a Yes Avoid in ESKD patients
Valproic acid <4 750–2,000 75–100 6–16 Same a ± NU-TPL = 50–120 mg/L
Vigabatrin 50 2,000–4,000 25 7 14 Unknown New drug; little experience 
in dialysis patients
ESKD, end-stage kidney disease; ESKD-TPL, therapeutic plasma concentration in dialysis patients; NU-TPL, therapeutic plasma concentration in nonuremic subjects.
aInferred (estimated) from pharmacokinetic considerations.
bInitial dose..
cExtensive metabolism to phenylethylmalonamide (PEMA) and phenobarbital. Primidone and PEMA are excreted unchanged, and 10%–40% of phenobarbital is excreted by the kidneys..
Pharmacokinetics of Anticonvulsants in Dialysis Patients
40.5
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   767 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
768
in dialysis patients, predisposing them to multi-infarct de-
mentia. At autopsy, the brains of these patients are seen to 
contain multiple lacunar infarcts in the basal ganglia, thal-
amus, internal capsule, pons, and cerebellum. Clinically, 
these patients present with a progressive stepwise decline 
in intellectual and neurologic functioning, and may have a 
variety of neurologic signs according to the site of the in-
farcts. The diagnosis of chronic subdural hematoma as a 
complication of anticoagulant treatment should always be 
borne in mind as the disease may present with pseudode-
mentia, drowsiness, and confusion. The diagnosis is made 
by appropriate neuroimaging. Both aluminum and iron can 
be found deposited in the brain in an accelerated fashion, 
and this can be associated with progressive reduction in 
cortical function. Metabolic disorders, including drug in-
toxication, are excluded by simple laboratory tests and a 
careful drug ingestion history. Lastly, thiamine deficiency 
has been described in a group of patients from Taiwan 
(Hung, 2001).
2. Subclinical cognitive dysfunction and depression.  Subclinical 
uremic encephalopathy may be present in chronic dialysis 
patients if inadequate dialysis is delivered. Severe depres -
sion (and sometimes anxiety) can impair cognitive func-
tion, but these may be detected only if detailed and regular 
neuropsychological assessment is undertaken.
A more common pattern, however, is as the result 
of widespread subcortical white matter brain injury. 
Leukoaraiosis has been described as a risk factor for de-
veloping dementia, mobility problems, and strokes and 
represents accelerated vascular aging. It is common in di-
alysis patients and, as with other forms of brain injury, is 
associated with inflammation, hypertension, and vascular 
disease. This form of subcortical injury occurs precisely in 
the vascular watershed area of the brain, where episodic 
intradialytic reduced perfusion would be expected to have 
its maximal effect. The few studies that have fully assessed 
cognitive loss in hemodialysis patients have identified 
relative preservation of memory and vocabulary (cortical 
pattern), but have shown significant loss of primarily sub-
cortical functions relating to decision making and execu-
tive functioning.
Of even more potential impact is the recent realization 
that subcortical subclinical ischemic white matter changes 
are associated with the interruption of intracerebral cir -
cuits, the loss of “thym ic balance, ” and the development of 
clinical depression. These circumstantial data, in combina-
tion with the temporal colocalization of significant increase 
in social dependency, clustered around initiation and the 
first 6 months of dialysis, raise the fascinating possibility 
of a new biologic basis for depression and increasing social 
dependency in hemodialysis patients.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   768 09/10/14   1:47 am
769Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
 II. SLEEP-RELATED DISORDERS. Su rveys of dialysis patients report that 
40%–50% have one or more sleep complaints, and more than 
50% studied in a sleep disorders laboratory have a sleep disorder 
objectively documented by polysomnography. Dialysis patients 
complain frequently of “insomnia” independent of anxiety or de-
pression. They may have difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep. 
Patients often complain of awakening frequently during the night 
without apparent cause. Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) is a 
frequent complaint. It is common to enter a dialysis unit during 
the daytime and find many patients fast asleep while undergoing 
dialysis. Chronic daytime sleepiness may affect cognitive func-
tioning, interfere with activities of daily living, and decrease qual-
ity of life. Daytime sleepiness may also interfere with the patient’s 
ability to work and place him or her in danger while driving or 
operating heavy equipment.
A. Sleep apnea.  S tudies have found sleep apnea in 50%–75% of 
dialysis patients with sleep-related complaints. Sleep apnea 
can be classified as obstructive, central, or mixed. Obstruc-
tive sleep apnea is a very common medical disorder resulting 
from a collapse of the upper airway during sleep in the pres-
ence of continuing respiratory effort. It is often associated 
with loud snoring, gasping, and snorting sounds during sleep. 
It is reported to occur in 4% of normal men and 2% of women 
30–60 years of age. As many as 81% of elderly nursing home 
patients are reported to have sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep 
apnea has been reported to be associated with increased mor-
bidity and mortality. This morbidity is most often related to 
cardiovascular (often associated with sympathetic overdrive) 
and cerebrovascular pathophysiologic processes, as well as 
accidents due to sleepiness. This obstruction appears to be 
largely due to upper airway edema and congestion/distortion 
of the nasopharynx. While dialysis patients may have obstruc-
tive sleep apnea, they also commonly have central sleep ap -
nea. In central apnea, neither respiratory effort nor airflow is 
present, suggesting a malfunction in the respiratory centers 
of the brain. Mixed apneas, which refer to central sleep apnea 
with an obstructive component, are not uncommon in the di-
alysis population.
B. Restless legs syndrome and periodic leg movements in sleep .
1. Restless legs. O ne of the most common complaints among 
ESKD patients is restless legs syndrome (RLS). RLS is a 
subjective complaint for which there is no objective test. 
Patients often describe an irritating sensation deep in the 
muscles of the lower leg, particularly in the calf muscle. 
 Patients can relieve this sensation only by moving their legs 
and feet. The irritating sensation typically appears when 
patients are at rest, often in the hours prior to the patient’s 
usual bedtime. RLS may significantly delay sleep onset.
2. PLMS. P eriodic leg movements in sleep (PLMS) is a common 
sleep disorder occurring with increased incidence with age 
and is common in the elderly of the general population. It 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   769 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
770
generally consists of a dorsiflexion of the foot or movement 
of the lower limb lasting 2–4 seconds and repeating every 
20–40 seconds numerous times. It occurs primarily in the 
first third of the sleep period during non–rapid eye move-
ment sleep. Each movement may result in a brief arousal 
from sleep and can be the source of complaints about unre-
freshing sleep and daytime fatigue. PLMS occurs in approxi-
mately 80% of patients who complain of RLS. PLMS is found 
in a very high percentage of ESKD patients. Dialysis patients 
with PLMS have a much higher number of movements per 
hour of sleep than patients in the general population with 
PLMS. In one case series of 45 dialysis patients, 71% had 
significant PLMS, with several patients having more than 
1,500 leg movements in a single night. Many of the PLMS 
incidents were associated with repetitive arousals, resulting 
in very poor-quality sleep, daytime complaints of fatigue, 
and increased mortality. Both presence of sleep apnea and 
a high PLMS index (e.g., more than 35 leg movements per 
hour of sleep) are associated with elevated mortality rates. 
It is not known whether this is causal or merely associative, 
and whether treatment will improve survival in such pa-
tients also has not been determined.
3. Diagnosis
a. History. A s leep history can easily be obtained using a 
questionnaire or brief interview. Patients or bed part -
ners should be questioned regarding quantity and qual-
ity of nocturnal sleep, number of awakenings from sleep, 
whether sleep is restorative, snoring, gasping, breathing 
pauses during sleep, lower limb movements (kicking) 
while awake or asleep, daytime fatigue, or inappropriate 
napping. Ingestion of medications and social habits (e.g., 
excess caffeine) associated with excess irritability should 
be reviewed.
b. Polysomnography. S leep disorders such as sleep apnea and 
PLMS in sleep are easily identifiable via standard diagnos-
tic polysomnography (sleep studies). These studies are usu-
ally performed in specially equipped laboratories found in 
many hospitals. Polysomnography generally encompasses 
simultaneous electroencephalography, electrooculogra -
phy, electromyography, and electrocardiography, as well 
as monitoring of breathing sounds, respiratory effort and 
airflow, arterial oxygen saturation, and leg movements 
during the patient’s usual sleep period.
4. T reatment of sleep apnea
a. Medication h as not been shown to be effective in the treat -
ment of obstructive sleep apnea. Benzodiazepines are 
contraindicated for obstructive sleep apnea, as are other 
CNS depressants, because they may result in longer ap-
neas, greater O2 desaturation, and more severe sleep frag-
mentation with consequently greater daytime fatigue.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   770 09/10/14   1:47 am
771Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
b. Nocturnal dialysis . B oth nocturnal hemodialysis and 
nocturnal cycler-assisted PD (Tang, 2006) have been re-
ported to bring about improvement in sleep apnea. The 
responsible mechanisms have not been established, but 
probably the provision of nocturnal ultrafiltration and 
improved volume control improves upper airway edema 
(directly measured by MRI), and this impacts on the ob-
structive element of sleep apnea (Elias, 2013).
c. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). C PAP consists of 
the administration of positive air pressure via the mouth 
or nares. The positive air pressure splints the upper airway 
open, effectively preventing obstruction. This has been 
shown to be an effective treatment for sleep apneas in the 
dialysis population, whether the cause is obstructive, cen-
tral, or mixed. Noncompliance is a problem, however, in pa-
tients who use CPAP treatment for obstructive sleep apnea.
d. Supplementary O2. A dministration of low-flow supplemen -
tal O2 has been reported to be a successful treatment for 
central sleep apnea in some recent studies. However, if 
obstructive sleep apnea is also present, low-flow O 2 may 
result in a lengthening of apnea duration.
e. Surgery .  V arious surgical approaches have been used for 
the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea. These usually 
involve the surgical reduction or removal of the uvula 
and tissues of the soft palate. Surgeries for obstructive 
sleep apnea have been reported to have an overall suc-
cess rate of 50%.
5. T reatment of RLS/PLMS
a. Conservative measures. I ron repletion is helpful in the gen-
eral population, but is very rarely a problem in dialysis 
patients owing to continual monitoring of iron status. 
Nonetheless, iron deficiency should be avoided. General 
advice about caffeine, alcohol, and nicotine avoidance 
is sometimes helpful. Regular stretching, exercise, mas-
sage, and either hot or cold baths may ameliorate symp-
toms. Chronic insomnia from restless legs adds to the 
burden of mood disturbance, which may perpetuate a 
cycle of poor sleep.
b. Medication. D opamine precursors or agonists such as l-
dopa have been shown to reduce the number and sever -
ity of both disorders and are considered the treatment of 
choice by many. Benzodiazepines, such as clonazepam, 
have been used for many years. Controversy exists as to 
whether benzodiazepines actually reduce the number of 
movements or simply suppress arousal. Longer-acting 
dopamine agonists such as ropinirole are now available 
but should be used cautiously in ESKD patients.
c. T ransplantation.  C omplete resolution of both sleep ap-
nea and RLS/PLMS has been reported following kidney 
transplantation.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   771 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
772
 III. PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY
A. Uremic neuropathy . U remic neuropathy is a distal, symmetric, 
mixed motor and sensory polyneuropathy. It typically involves 
the legs more than the arms. Clinical manifestations include 
paresthesia in the feet, painful dysesthesia, ataxia, and weak -
ness. The sense of position and the vibratory threshold often 
are impaired. Physiologic studies show slowing of motor nerve 
conduction and sensory action potentials. The condition is 
due to one or more toxins retained in uremia and inadequately 
removed by dialysis. In patients with coexisting diabetes, the 
development of disabling neuropathy can be rapid, and unrav-
eling the contribution of each cause may be difficult.
With effective dialysis, clinical uremic neuropathy is un-
usual, but subclinical manifestations can be detected in over 
50% of patients. Serial electrophysiologic monitoring has been 
used to assess the adequacy of dialysis schedules, but is not 
routinely employed. If clinical signs of peripheral neuropathy 
appear, then the adequacy of the dialysis treatment should be 
carefully evaluated using urea kinetic modeling. A switch to a 
high-flux membrane or hemodiafiltration to increase the re -
moval of middle molecules may be of benefit. More frequent 
hemodialysis, and especially six times per week nocturnal 
hemodialysis, may improve neuropathy, but solid data on 
neuropathy are not yet available. Neuropathy is most reliably 
reversed by successful renal transplantation.
1. Differential diagnosis.  U remic neuropathy has to be distin-
guished from disturbed peripheral nerve function owing 
to an underlying systemic disease (e.g., amyloidosis or 
diabetes mellitus). Table 40.6 gives an abbreviated list of 
disorders to be considered in the differential diagnosis. 
Pyridoxine supplementation has been reported to improve 
peripheral polyneuropathy in a group of elderly Japanese 
dialysis patients; however, this was not a controlled study, 
and baseline pyridoxal 5´-phosphate levels were not de-
creased (Moriwaki, 2000).
B. Mononeuropathies (carpal tunnel syndrome). O ccasionally, prolonged 
recumbency during the hemodialysis procedure leads to ulnar 
and peroneal nerve palsies; however, the most common neu-
ropathy is carpal tunnel syndrome, which is due to compression 
Diabetes mellitus
Ethanol abuse
Amyloidosis
Malnutrition
Polyarteritis
Lupus erythematosus
Multiple myeloma
Thiamine deficiency
Principal Differential Diagnoses of Uremic Polyneuropathy
40.6
TABLE
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   772 09/10/14   1:47 am
773Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
of the median nerve at the wrist where it passes through a nar-
rowed carpal tunnel. Prevalence also increases with years on di-
alysis and is as high as 73% in patients who have been receiving 
hemodialysis for 10 years or longer. The pathogenesis appears 
to be multifactorial. Deposits of β2-microglobulin amyloid may 
compress the median nerve as it passes through the carpal tun-
nel; however, amyloid is not present in all biopsy specimens. 
Some patients report exacerbation of symptoms during he-
modialysis, perhaps due to a fistula-induced arterial steal phe-
nomenon causing median nerve ischemia. Also, the increase in 
extracellular fluid volume between dialysis treatments may lead 
to edema and median nerve compression.
1. Symptoms. M ost often, patients complain of numbness, 
tingling, burning, or a sensation of “pins and needles” in 
the fingers of the affected hand. The hand may feel stiff 
or swollen. Although symptoms are usually present in the 
distribution of the median nerve (over the thumb, index 
and middle fingers, and radial aspect of the ring finger), pa-
tients sometimes complain of sensory disturbance over the 
entire hand. Aching pain may be referred to the forearm. 
Symptoms are often worse at night or during hemodialysis, 
and are exacerbated by activities involving repeated flexion 
and extension at the wrist. They occur more frequently on 
the side of the longest functioning vascular access. How-
ever, some patients have developed symptoms in an arm 
that never had been used for a graft or fistula.
2. Examination. I n early cases, there may be no objective loss 
of sensation or muscle strength. Symptoms can often be 
provoked by tapping over the palmar aspect of the carpal 
tunnel (Tinel sign) or by having the patient hold his or her 
wrists in a flexed position for 1 minute (Phalen sign). In 
more advanced cases, perception of light touch, pinprick, 
temperature, or two-point discrimination may be dimin -
ished in the distribution of the median nerve. The abductor 
pollicis brevis muscle may be weak and, in longstanding 
cases, there may be atrophy of the thenar eminence.
3. Diagnosis. T he differential diagnoses of carpal tunnel syn-
drome include spondylosis of the lower cervical spine, 
thoracic outlet syndrome, sensorimotor polyneuropathy 
or mononeuropathy, and radial arterial steal syndrome in 
patients with an arteriovenous access. Except in early cases, 
the diagnosis can usually be established definitively by elec-
tromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity studies.
4. T reatment.  S plinting the affected wrist in a neutral resting 
position, especially at night and during dialysis treatments, 
may relieve symptoms temporarily. If splinting is unsuc-
cessful or poorly tolerated, injection of the carpal tunnel 
with microcrystalline corticosteroid esters will provide 
about 30% of patients with permanent relief. If symptoms 
improve inadequately after injection, or if there is signifi-
cant objective loss of motor or sensory function, surgical 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   773 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
774
decompression of the carpal tunnel yields improvement in 
more than 90%, but symptoms often recur within 2 years.
 I V. FINGER FLExION CONTRACTURES. β2-Microglobulin amyloid can de-
posit along the flexor tendons of the hands, also. These deposits 
may make the digital flexor tendons of the hand adhere to one an-
other, creating a subcutaneous soft tissue mass in the palm and 
irreducible flexion contractures of the fingers. Surgical debride-
ment of amyloid deposits from the flexor tendon sheaths may al-
low greater finger extension, but these deposits frequently recur 
within several years.
 V. ATLANTO-CERVICAL SPONDYLOPATHY. P rogressive neck instabil-
ity and cord compression due to destructive β 2-microglobulin–
derived amyloidosis has been described in long-term dialysis 
patients. The condition can be diagnosed by MRI. Early decom-
pression is vital to avoid major disability. Radiographic features 
include narrowing of the intervertebral disk spaces and erosion of 
the vertebral end plates without appreciable formation of osteo -
phyte. The lower cervical spine is most often affected, but similar 
changes may also occur in the dorsal and lumbar spine. Cystic 
deposits of β 2-microglobulin amyloid can be seen within the 
odontoid process and the vertebral bodies of the upper cervical 
spine. Also, peri-odontoid soft tissue masses of β 2-microglobulin 
amyloid, termed “pseudotumors, ” may be present. The initial 
symptom of destructive spondyloarthropathy is pain, typically 
in the neck when the cervical spine is involved. However, most 
patients with radiographic abnormalities have no neck pain. Al -
though neurologic compromise occurs infrequently, significant 
myelopathy has been reported, especially in patients who have 
received hemodialysis for 20 years or longer. Severe destructive 
spondyloarthropathy must be differentiated from vertebral os-
teomyelitis by MRI.
 VI. MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC P AIN. C hronic pain is very challenging 
to manage in patients receiving maintenance dialysis. Standard 
hierarchical escalation of analgesic type and choice may not be 
appropriate. Effective and consistent analgesia without unac-
ceptable side effects is difficult to achieve from the point of view 
of both drug type choice, and dose and frequency. Intermittent 
drug removal by hemodialysis provides an additional dimen-
sion to consider. Considerable trial and error is often required 
to achieve this balance, and availability of a specialist pain relief 
team with relevant experience with dialysis patients is highly 
desirable. Access to additional measures such as selective nerve 
blocks, regional anesthesia, and intra-articular injection may 
provide optimal pain relief with minimized use of potentially 
toxic medication with a narrow therapeutic window.
Regular simple analgesics (such as paracetemol [called ac-
etaminophen in the United States]) are the bedrock of chronic 
pain management. NSAID use may be appropriate in anephric 
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   774 09/10/14   1:47 am
775Chapter 40 / Nervous System and Sleep Disorders 
patients, but the risk of sudden loss of residual renal function 
needs to be carefully considered in patients with some degree of 
retained renal function. If NSAIDs are used, doses at the lower 
end of the potential range and lower potency agents such as 
ibuprofen are preferred. Opiates characteristically accumulate 
in this setting, and may be markedly dialyzed out, precipitat -
ing acute pain relating to hemodialysis sessions. Even the use of 
weaker agents such as codeine can result in severe obtundation 
and respiratory arrest. Opiates, however, are often necessary to 
provide adequate symptom relief. In general, dosing intervals 
need extending rather than doses limited, slow release prepara-
tions should be avoided, and access to “top up” doses may need 
to be limited. Transdermal release patches can be useful, espe-
cially utilizing drugs such as fentanyl, which rely on hepatic dis-
posal. The lowest dose formulation should be utilized initially. 
Adequate time should be allowed for any of these opioid agents 
to achieve steady state before escalation of the analgesic algo -
rithm. Co-analgesic drugs such as antidepressants (e.g., tricyclic 
antidepressants) or anticonvulsants (e.g., gabapentin) are often 
considered in intractable pain, particularly with a neuropathic 
element. These can be especially troublesome to utilize without 
excessive sedation and poor quality of life. Again , doses should 
be started at the lowest possible level, with very careful dose es-
calation. Combination of these agents should be avoided if pos-
sible. Finally, it is important that nonpharmaceutical strategies in 
pain management are not neglected. Patients should be closely 
involved in decision making, and efforts should be made to ex -
plain the challenges and manage expectations. Additional inter -
ventions such as psychological interventions should be given due 
consideration.
References and Suggested Readings
Apostolou T, Gokal R. Neuropathy and quality-of-life in diabetic continuous ambula-
tory peritoneal dialysis patients. Perit Dial Int. 1999;19(suppl 2):S242–S247.
Arnold R, et al. Effects of hemodiafiltration and high flux hemodialysis on nerve excit-
ability in end-stage kidney disease. PLoS One. 2013;8:e59055.
Benz RL, et al. Potential novel predictors of mortality in end-stage renal disease 
 patients with sleep disorders. Am J Kidney Dis. 2000;35:1052–1060.
Benz RL, Pressman MR, Wu X. Periodic limb movements in sleep revealed by treat-
ment of sleep apnea with continuous positive airway pressure in the advanced 
chronic kidney disease population. Clin Nephrol. 2011;76:470–474.
Chang JM, et al. Fatal outcome after ingestion of star fruit (Averrhoa carambola) in 
uremic patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2000;35:189–193.
Davison SN. Pain in hemodialysis patients: prevalence, cause, severity, and manage-
ment. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42:1239–1247.
Dharia SM, Brown LK, Unruh ML. Recognition and treatment of obstructive sleep 
apnea. Semin Dial. 2013;26:273–277.
Diaz A, Deliz B, Benbadis SR. The use of newer antiepileptic drugs in patients with 
renal failure. Expert Rev Neurother. 2012;12:99–105.
Edmunds ME, Walls J. Pathogenesis of seizures during recombinant human erythro-
poietin therapy. Semin Dial. 1991;4:163.
Eldehni MT, McIntyre CW . Are there neurological consequences of recurrent intradia-
lytic hypotension? Semin Dial. 2012;25:253–256.
Eldehini MT, Odudu A, McIntyre CW .  Randomized clinical trial of dialyzate cooling 
and effects on brain white matter. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014, in press.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   775 09/10/14   1:47 am
Part IV / Clinical Problem Areas
776
Elias RM, et al. Relationship of pharyngeal water content and jugular volume with 
severity of obstructive sleep apnea in renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2013;28:937–944.
Forsberg U, et al. Microemboli, developed during haemodialysis, pass the lung barrier 
and may cause ischaemic lesions in organs such as the brain. Nephrol Dial Trans-
plant. 2010;25:2691–2695.
Glenn CM, et al. Dialysis-associated seizures in children and adolescents. Pediatr 
Nephrol. 1992;6:182.
Hanly PJ, et al. Daytime sleepiness in patients with CRF: impact of nocturnal hemodi-
alysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;41:403–410.
Hung SC, et al. Thiamine deficiency and unexplained encephalopathy in hemodialysis 
and peritoneal dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001;38:941–947.
Iftikhar S, Dahbour S, Nauman S. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus: high incidence in 
dialysis-dependent patients. Hemodial Int. 2007;11:392–397.
Kang HJ, et al. Does carpal tunnel release provide long-term relief in patients with hemodi-
alysis-associated carpal tunnel syndrome? Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2012;470:2561–2565.
Kavanagh D, et al. Restless legs syndrome in patients on dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2004;43:763–771.
Kiley JE. Residual renal and dialyser clearance, EEG slowing, and nerve conduction 
velocity. ASAIO J. 1981;4:1.
Lass P , et al. Cognitive impairment in patients with renal failure is associated with 
multiple-infarct dementia. Clin Nucl Med. 1999;24:561–565.
Marsh JT, et al. rHuEPO treatment improves brain and cognitive function of anemic 
dialysis patients. Kidney Int. 1991;39:155.
McIntyre CW . Recurrent circulatory stress: the dark side of dialysis. Semin Dial. 
2010;23:449–451.
McIntyre CW , et al. Circulating endotoxemia: a novel factor in systemic inflamma -
tion and cardiovascular disease in chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2011;6:133–141.
Molnar MZ, Novak M, Mucsi I. Management of restless legs syndrome in patients on 
dialysis. Drugs. 2006;66:607–624.
Moriwaki K, et al. Vitamin B6 deficiency in elderly patients on chronic peritoneal 
 dialysis. Adv Perit Dial. 2000;16:308–312.
Nakatani T, et al. Silent cerebral infarction in hemodialysis patients. Am J Nephrol. 
2003;23:86–90.
Nicholl DD, et al. Diagnostic value of screening instruments for identifying obstructive 
sleep apnea in kidney failure. J Clin Sleep Med. 2013;9:31–38.
Novak M, et al. Diagnosis and management of sleep apnea syndrome and restless legs 
syndrome in dialysis patients. Semin Dial. 2006;19:210–216.
Novak M, et al. Diagnosis and management of insomnia in dialysis patients. Semin 
Dial. 2006;19:25–31.
Nicholl DD, et al. Diagnostic value of screening instruments for identifying obstructive 
sleep apnea in kidney failure. J Clin Sleep Med. 2013;9:31–38.
Odudu A, Francis ST, McIntyre CW . MRI for the assessment of organ perfusion in pa-
tients with chronic kidney disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2012;21:647–654.
Okada H, et al. Vitamin B 6 supplementation can improve peripheral neuropathy in 
patients with chronic renal failure on high-flux hemodialysis and human recom-
binant erythropoietin. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2000;16:1410–1413.
Pressman MR, Benz RL. Sleep disordered breathing in ESRD: acute beneficial 
 effects of treatment with nasal continuous positive airway pressure. Kidney Int. 
1993;43:1134–1139.
Prohovnik I, et al. Cerebrovascular effects of hemodialysis in chronic kidney disease.  
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2007;27:1861–1869.
Santoro D, et al. Pain in end-stage renal disease: a frequent and neglected clinical prob-
lem. Clin Nephrol. 2013;79 (suppl 1):S2–S11.
Silver SM. Cerebral edema after hemodialysis: the “reverse urea effect” lives. Int J Artif 
Organs. 1998;21:247–250.
Tang S, et al. Alleviation of sleep apnea in patients with chronic renal failure by noc-
turnal cycler-assisted peritoneal dialysis compared with conventional continuous 
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006;17:2607–2616.
Tucker KL, et al. High homocysteine and low B vitamin predict cognitive decline 
in aging men: the Veterans Affairs Normative Aging Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2005;82:627–635.
Daugirdas9781451144291-ch040.indd   776 09/10/14   1:47 am